<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<!--Preface endnotes begin-->
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the remarks of P.-L. Courier (on Larcher’s version) in the preface to his specimens of a new translation of Herodotus (<i>OEuvres complètes de P.-L. Courier</i>, Bruxelles, 1828). <a href="praface.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Woods, for example, in his edition of the first book (published in 1873) gives a list of readings for the first and second books, in which he almost invariably prefers the authority of Gronovius to that of Stein, where their reports differ. In so doing he is wrong in all cases (I think) except one, namely <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 134 <span xml:lang="grc">τῷ λεγομένῳ</span>. He is wrong, for examine, in <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 189, where the <abbr>MS.</abbr> has <span xml:lang="grc">τοῦτο</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 196 <span xml:lang="grc">ἂν ἄγεσθαι</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 199 <span xml:lang="grc">ὁδῶν</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 15 <span xml:lang="grc">τῇ δὴ</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 95 <span xml:lang="grc">ὑπ' αὐτò</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 103 <span xml:lang="grc">καì προσηώτατα</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 124 <span xml:lang="grc">τῷ ἄλλῳ</span> (without <span xml:lang="grc">λαῷ</span>), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 181 <span xml:lang="grc">υῷ</span>. Abicht also has made several inaccurate statements, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 185, where the <abbr>MS.</abbr> has <span xml:lang="grc">ἑς τòν Εὐφπήτην</span>, and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 133 <span xml:lang="grc">Ξέρξης</span>. <a href="praface.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For example in the index of proper names attached to Stein’s annotated edition (Berlin, 1882), to which I am under obligation, having checked my own by it, I find that I have marked upwards of two hundred mistakes or oversights: no doubt I have been saved by it from at least as many. <a href="praface.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<!--Preface endnotes end-->
				<!--Book I endnotes begin-->
				<p>1 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-1">return</a>)<br/>
				<span xml:lang="grc">Ἡροδότον Ἁλικαρνησσέος ἀπόδεξις ἥδε, ὡς κ.τ.λ.</span> The meaning of the word <span xml:lang="grc">ἱστορίη</span> passes gradually from “research” or “inquiry” to “narrative,” “history”; cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 96. Aristotle in quoting these words writes <span xml:lang="grc">Θονρίου</span> for <span xml:lang="grc">Ἁλικαρνησσέος</span> (“Herodotus of Thurii”), and we know from Plutarch that this reading existed in his time as a variation.]</p>
				<p>2 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-2">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Probably <span xml:lang="grc">ἐργα</span> may here mean enduring monuments like the pyramids and the works at Samos, cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 93, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 35, <abbr>etc.</abbr>; in that case <span xml:lang="grc">τά τε ἀλλα</span> refers back to <span xml:lang="grc">τὰ γενόμενα</span>, though the verb <span xml:lang="grc">ἐπολέμησαν</span> derives its subject from the mention of Hellenes and Barbarians in the preceding clause.]</p>
				<p>3 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-3">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Many Editors have “with the Phenicians,” on the authority of some inferior <abbr>MSS.</abbr> and of the Aldine edition.]</p>
				<p>4 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-4">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <span xml:lang="grc">ἁρπαγῆς</span>.]</p>
				<p>401 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-401">return</a>)<br/>
				[ “thus or in some other particular way.”]</p>
				<p>5 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-5">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <span xml:lang="grc">Συρίων</span>, see ch. 72. Herodotus perhaps meant to distinguish <span xml:lang="grc">Σύριοι</span> from <span xml:lang="grc">Σύροι</span>, and to use the first name for the Cappadokians and the second for the people of Palestine, cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 104; but they are naturally confused in the <abbr>MSS.</abbr>]</p>
				<p>6 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-6">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <span xml:lang="grc">ἐξ ἐπιδρομῆς ἁρπαγή</span>.]</p>
				<p>7 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-7">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <span xml:lang="grc">τῆς ἀνοιγομένης θύρης</span>, “the door that is opened.”]</p>
				<p>8 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-8">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or “because she was ashamed.”]</p>
				<p>9 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-9">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <span xml:lang="grc">Φοιτᾶν</span>.]</p>
				<p>10 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-10">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <span xml:lang="grc">ὑπεισδὺς</span>: Stein adopts the conjecture <span xml:lang="grc">ὑπεκδὺς</span>, “slipping out of his hiding-place.”]</p>
				<p>11 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-11">return</a>)<br/>
				[ This last sentence is by many regarded as an interpolation. The line referred to is {Ou moi ta Gugeo tou polukhrosou melei}.]</p>
				<p>12 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-12">return</a>)<br/>
				[ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. 92.]</p>
				<p>13 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-13">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> like other kings of Lydia who came after him.]</p>
				<p>14 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-14">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {Kolophonos to astu}, as opposed apparently to the acropolis, cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. 51.]</p>
				<p>15 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-15">return</a>)<br/>
				[ See ch. 73.]</p>
				<p>16 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-16">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {o kai esballon tenikauta es ten Milesien ten stratien}: an allusion apparently to the invasions of the Milesian land at harvest time, which are described above. All the operations mentioned in the last chapter have been loosely described to Alyattes, and a correction is here added to inform the reader that they belong equally to his father. It will hardly mend matters much if we take {o Audos} in ch. 17 to include both father and son.]</p>
				<p>17 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-17">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {didaxanta}.]</p>
				<p>18 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-18">return</a>)<br/>
				[ This name is applied by Herodotus to the southern part of the peninsula only.]</p>
				<p>19 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-19">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Tarentum.]</p>
				<p>20 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-20">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {en toisi edolioisi}: properly “benches,” but probably here the raised deck at the stern.]</p>
				<p>21 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-21">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ou mega}: many of the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {mega}.]</p>
				<p>22 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-22">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {stadioi}: furlongs of about 606 English feet.]</p>
				<p>23 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-23">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {to epilogo}.]</p>
				<p>24 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-24">return</a>)<br/>
				[ This list of nations is by some suspected as an interpolation; see Stein’s note on the passage.]</p>
				<p>25 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-25">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {sophistai}: cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 49, and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. 95.]</p>
				<p>26 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-26">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {etheto}.]</p>
				<p>27 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-27">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {olbiotaton}.]</p>
				<p>28 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-28">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {stadious}.]</p>
				<p>29 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-29">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {romen}: many of the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {gnomen}, “good disposition.”]</p>
				<p>30 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-30">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> their mother: but some understand it to mean the goddess.]</p>
				<p>31 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-31">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {en telei touto eskhonto}.]</p>
				<p>32 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-32">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {anolbioi}.]</p>
				<p>33 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-33">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {eutukhees}.]</p>
				<p>34 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-34">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {aperos}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {apeiros}.]</p>
				<p>35 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-35">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {aikhme sideree blethenta}.]</p>
				<p>36 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-36">return</a>)<br/>
				[ “in the house of Croesus.”]</p>
				<p>37 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-37">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {‘Epistion}.]</p>
				<p>38 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-38">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {‘Etaireion}.]</p>
				<p>39 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-39">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {suggrapsamenous}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> have it written down by the {propsetes} (see <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 111 and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. 37), who interpreted and put into regular verse the inspired utterances of the prophetess {promantis}.]</p>
				<p>40 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-40">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {es to megaron}.]</p>
				<p>41 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-41">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {oida d’ ego}: oracles often have a word of connection such as {de} or {alla} at the beginning (cp. ch. 55, 174, <abbr>etc.</abbr>), which may indicate that they are part of a larger connected utterance.]</p>
				<p>42 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-42">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 178 and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. 91 (“I accept the omen.”)]</p>
				<p>43 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-43">return</a>)<br/>
				[ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. 134.]</p>
				<p>44 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-44">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {kai touton}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> Amphiaraos: many Editors retain the readings of the Aldine edition, {kai touto}, “that in this too he had found a true Oracle.”]</p>
				<p>45 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-45">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {emiplinthia}, the plinth being supposed to be square.]</p>
				<p>46 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-46">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {exapalaiota}, the palm being about three inches, cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 149.]</p>
				<p>47 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-47">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {apephthou khrusou}, “refined gold.”]</p>
				<p>48 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-48">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {triton emitalanton}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {tria emitalanta}, which has been corrected partly on the authority of Valla’s translation.]</p>
				<p>49 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-49">return</a>)<br/>
				[ “white gold.”]</p>
				<p>50 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-50">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Arranged evidently in stages, of which the highest consisted of the 4 half-plinths of pure gold, the second of 15 half-plinths, the third of 35, the fourth of 63, making 117 in all: see Stein’s note.]</p>
				<p>51 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-51">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {elkon stathmon einaton emitalanton kai eti duodeka mneas}. The {mnea} (mina) is 15.2 <abbr>oz.</abbr>., and 60 of them go to a talent.]</p>
				<p>52 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-52">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {epi tou proneiou tes gonies}, cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. 122: the use of {epi} seems to suggest some kind of raised cornerstone upon which the offerings stood.]</p>
				<p>53 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-53">return</a>)<br/>
				[ The {amphoreus} is about 9 gallons.]</p>
				<p>54 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-54">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. 41.]</p>
				<p>55 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-55">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {perirranteria}.]</p>
				<p>56 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-56">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {kheumata}, which some translate “jugs” or “bowls.”]</p>
				<p>57 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-57">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {umin}, as if both Oracles were being addressed together.]</p>
				<p>58 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-58">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> Delphi.]</p>
				<p>59 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-59">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {enephoreeto}, “he filled himself with it.”]</p>
				<p>60 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-60">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {Krestona}: Niebuhr would read {Krotona} (Croton or Cortona in Etruria), partly on the authority of Dionysius: see Stein’s note. Two of the best <abbr>MSS.</abbr> are defective in this part of the book.]</p>
				<p>61 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-61">return</a>)<br/>
				[ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 51 and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. 137.]</p>
				<p>62 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-62">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {auxetai es plethos ton ethneon pollon}: “has increased to a multitude of its races, which are many.” Stein and Abicht both venture to adopt the conjecture {Pelasgon} for {pollon}, “Pelasgians especially being added to them, and also many other Barbarian nations.”]</p>
				<p>6201 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-6201">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {pros de on emoige dokeei}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {emoi te}. Some Editors read {os de on} (Stein {prosthe de on}) for {pros de on}. This whole passage is probably in some way corrupt, but it can hardly be successfully emended.]</p>
				<p>63 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-63">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> as it is of the Hellenic race before it parted from the Pelasgian and ceased to be Barbarian.]</p>
				<p>64 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-64">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {katekhomenon te kai diespasmenon⁠ ⁠… upo Peisistratou}. Peisistratos was in part at least the cause of the divisions.]</p>
				<p>65 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-65">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {paralon}.]</p>
				<p>66 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-66">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {uperakrion}.]</p>
				<p>67 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-67">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {toutous}: some read by conjecture {triekosious}, “three hundred,” the number which he actually had according to Polyænus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 21.]</p>
				<p>68 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-68">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {doruphoroi}, the usual word for a bodyguard.]</p>
				<p>69 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-69">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {perielaunomenos de te stasi}: Stein says “harassed by attacks of his own party,” but the passage to which he refers in ch. 61, {katallasseto ten ekhthren toisi stasiotesi}, may be referred to in the quarrel made with his party by Megacles when he joined Peisistratos.]</p>
				<p>70 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-70">return</a>)<br/>
				[ More literally, “since from ancient time the Hellenic race had been marked off from the Barbarians as being more skilful and more freed from foolish simplicity, (and) since at that time among the Athenians, who are accounted the first of the Hellenes in ability, these men devised a trick as follows.”]</p>
				<p>71 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-71">return</a>)<br/>
				[ The cubit is reckoned as 24 fingerbreadths, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> about 18 inches.]</p>
				<p>72 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-72">return</a>)<br/>
				[ So Rawlinson.]</p>
				<p>73 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-73">return</a>)<br/>
				[ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. 70.]</p>
				<p>74 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-74">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {dia endekatou eteos}. Not quite the same as {dia evdeka eteon} (“after an interval of eleven years”); rather “in the eleventh year” (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> “after an interval of ten years”).]</p>
				<p>75 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-75">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {thein pompe khreomenos}.]</p>
				<p>76 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-76">return</a>)<br/>
				[ For {‘Akarnan} it has been suggested to read {‘Akharneus}, because this man is referred to as an Athenian by various writers. However Acarnanians were celebrated for prophetic power, and he might be called an Athenian as resident with Peisistratos at Athens.]</p>
				<p>77 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-77">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or “for that part of the land from which the temple could be seen,” but cp. Thuc. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. 104. In either case the meaning is the same.]</p>
				<p>7701 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-7701">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {enomotias kai triekadas kai sussitia}. The {enomotia} was the primary division of the Spartan army: of the {triekas} nothing is known for certain.]</p>
				<p>78 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-78">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {kibdelo}, properly “counterfeit”: cp. ch. 75.]</p>
				<p>79 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-79">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {skhoino diametresamenoi}: whether actually, for the purpose of distributing the work among them, or because the rope which fastened them together lay on the ground like a measuring-tape, is left uncertain.]</p>
				<p>80 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-80">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. 70.]</p>
				<p>81 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-81">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {epitarrothos}. Elsewhere (that is in Homer) the word always means “helper,” and Stein translates it so here, “thou shalt be protector and patron of Tegea” (in the place of Orestes). <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Woods explains it by the parallel of such phrases as {Danaoisi makhes epitarrothoi}, to mean “thou shalt be a helper (of the Lacedemonians) in the matter of Tegea,” but this perhaps would be a form of address too personal to the envoy, who is usually addressed in the second person, but only as representative of those who sent him. The conjectural reading {epitarrothon exeis}, “thou shalt have him as a helper against Tegea,” is tempting.]</p>
				<p>82 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-82">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {agathoergon}.]</p>
				<p>83 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-83">return</a>)<br/>
				[ This was to enable him the better to gain his ends at Tegea.]</p>
				<p>84 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-84">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Cp. ch. 51, note.]</p>
				<p>85 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-85">return</a>)<br/>
				[ See ch. 6.]</p>
				<p>86 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-86">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {euzono andri}: cp. ch. 104 and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 34. The word {euzonos} is used of light-armed troops; Hesychius says, {euzonos, me ekhon phortion}.]</p>
				<p>87 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-87">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {orgen ouk akros}: this is the reading of all the best <abbr>MSS.</abbr>, and it is sufficiently supported by the parallel of <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. 124, {psukhen ouk akros}. Most Editors however have adopted the reading {orgen akros}, as equivalent to {akrakholos}, “quick-tempered.”]</p>
				<p>88 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-88">return</a>)<br/>
				[ It has been suggested by some that this clause is not genuine. It should not, however, be taken to refer to the battle which was interrupted by the eclipse, for (1) that did not occur in the period here spoken of; (2) the next clause is introduced by {de} (which can hardly here stand for {gar}); (3) when the eclipse occurred the fighting ceased, therefore it was no more a {nuktomakhin} than any other battle which is interrupted by darkness coming on.]</p>
				<p>89 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-89">return</a>)<br/>
				[ See ch. 188. <i>Nabunita</i> was his true name.]</p>
				<p>90 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-90">return</a>)<br/>
				[ See ch. 107 <abbr>ff.</abbr>]</p>
				<p>91 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-91">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Not “somewhere near the city of Sinope,” for it must have been at a considerable distance and probably far inland. Sinope itself is at least fifty miles to the west of the Halys. I take it to mean that Pteria was nearly due south of Sinope, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> that the nearest road from Pteria to the sea led to Sinope. Pteria no doubt was the name of a region as well as of a city.]</p>
				<p>92 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-92">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {anastatous epoiese}.]</p>
				<p>93 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-93">return</a>)<br/>
				[ This is the son of the man mentioned in ch. 74.]</p>
				<p>94 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-94">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {us en autou xeinikos}. Stein translates “so much of it as was mercenary,” but it may be doubted if this is possible. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Woods, “which army of his was a foreign one.”]</p>
				<p>95 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-95">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {Metros Dindumenes}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> Kybele: the mountain is Dindymos in Phrygia.]</p>
				<p>96 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-96">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the whole strip of territory to the West of the peninsula of Argolis, which includes Thyrea and extends southwards to Malea: “westwards as far as Malea” would be absurd.]</p>
				<p>97 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-97">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {outos}: a conjectural emendation of {autos}.]</p>
				<p>98 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-98">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {autos}: some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> read {o autos}, “this same man.”]</p>
				<p>99 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-99">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {aneneikamenon}, nearly equivalent to {anastemaxanta} (cp. Hom. Il. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. 314), {mnesamenos d’ adinos aneneikato phonesen te}. Some translate it here, “he recovered himself,” cp. ch. 116, {aneneikhtheis}.]</p>
				<p>100 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-100">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ubristai}.]</p>
				<p>101 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-101">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {proesousi}: a conjectural emendation of {poiesousi}, adopted in most of the modern editions.]</p>
				<p>102 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-102">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {touto oneidisai}: or {touton oneidisai}, “to reproach the god with these things.” The best <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {touto}.]</p>
				<p>103 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-103">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {to kai⁠ ⁠… eipe ta eipe Loxias k.t.l.}: various emendations have been proposed. If anyone is to be adopted, the boldest would perhaps be the best, {to de kai⁠ ⁠… eipe Loxias}.]</p>
				<p>104 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-104">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {oia te kai alle khore}, “such as other lands have.”]</p>
				<p>105 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-105">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {stadioi ex kai duo plethra}.]</p>
				<p>106 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-106">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {plethra tria kai deka}.]</p>
				<p>107 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-107">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {Gugaie}.]</p>
				<p>108 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-108">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or “Tyrrhenia.”]</p>
				<p>109 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-109">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or “Umbrians.”]</p>
				<p>110 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-110">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {tes ano ‘Asies}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the parts which are removed from the Mediterranean.]</p>
				<p>111 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-111">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> nature would not be likely to supply so many regularly ascending circles. Stein alters the text so that the sentence runs thus, “and whereas there are seven circles of all, within the last is the royal palace,” <abbr>etc.</abbr>]</p>
				<p>112 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-112">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> “to laugh or to spit is unseemly for those in presence of the king, and this last for all, whether in the presence of the king or not.” Cp. Xen. Cyrop. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 2. 16, {aiskhron men gar eti kai nun esti Persais kai to apoptuein kai to apomuttesthai}, (quoted by Stein, who however gives a different interpretation).]</p>
				<p>113 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-113">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {tauta de peri eouton esemnune}: the translation given is that of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Woods.]</p>
				<p>114 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-114">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {allos mentoi eouton eu ekontes}: the translation is partly due to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Woods.]</p>
				<p>115 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-115">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> East of the Halys: see note on ch. 95.]</p>
				<p>116 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-116">return</a>)<br/>
				[ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. 12.]</p>
				<p>117 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-117">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Cp. ch. 72.]</p>
				<p>118 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-118">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ten katuperthe odon}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> further away from the Euxine eastwards.]</p>
				<p>119 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-119">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {o theos}.]</p>
				<p>120 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-120">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {khoris men gar phoron}: many Editors substitute {phoron} for {phoron}, but {phoron} may stand if taken not with {khoris} but with {to ekastoisi epeballon}.]</p>
				<p>121 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-121">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Cp. ch. 184, “the Assyrian history.”]</p>
				<p>122 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-122">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {uperthemenos}, a conjectural emendation of {upothemenos}, cp. ch. 108 where the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> give {uperthemenos}, (the Medicean with {upo} written above as a correction).]</p>
				<p>123 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-123">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or “expose me to risk,” “stake my safety.”]</p>
				<p>124 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-124">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or “thou wilt suffer the most evil kind of death”: cp. ch. 167.]</p>
				<p>12401 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-12401">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {tas aggelias pherein}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> to have the office of {aggeliephoros} (ch. 120) or {esaggeleus} (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. 84), the chamberlain through whom communications passed.]</p>
				<p>125 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-125">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {dialabein}. So translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Woods.]</p>
				<p>126 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-126">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {es tas anagkas}, “to the necessity,” mentioned above.]</p>
				<p>127 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-127">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or “to celebrate good fortune.”]</p>
				<p>128 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-128">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {akreon kheiron te kai podon}: cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 121 (e), {apotamonta en to omo ten kheira}.]</p>
				<p>129 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-129">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {esti te o pais kai periesti}. So translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Woods.]</p>
				<p>130 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-130">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {erkhe}: a few inferior <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {eikhe}, which is adopted by several Editors.]</p>
				<p>131 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-131">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {para smikra⁠ ⁠… kekhoreke}, “have come out equal to trifles.”]</p>
				<p>132 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-132">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {kuon}: cp. ch. 110.]</p>
				<p>133 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-133">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {su nun}, answering to {se gar theoi eporeousi}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> and some Editors read {su nun}.]</p>
				<p>134 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-134">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> of the race of Perses: see <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 61.]</p>
				<p>135 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-135">return</a>)<br/>
				[ “how his change from a throne to slavery was as compared with that feast, <abbr>etc.</abbr>,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> what did he think of it as a retribution.]</p>
				<p>136 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-136">return</a>)<br/>
				[ See ch. 106. The actual duration of the Median supremacy would be therefore a hundred years.]</p>
				<p>13601 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-13601">return</a>)<br/>
				[ This is by some altered to “Alilat,” by comparison of <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. 8.]</p>
				<p>137 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-137">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {stemmasi}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the chaplets wound round with wool which were worn at Hellenic sacrifices.]</p>
				<p>138 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-138">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {oulesi}.]</p>
				<p>13801 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-13801">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 61.]</p>
				<p>139 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-139">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {sitoisi}: perhaps “plain dishes.”]</p>
				<p>140 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-140">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {proskuneei}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> kisses his feet or the ground.]</p>
				<p>141 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-141">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ton legomenon}, a correction of {to legomeno}. (The Medicean <abbr>MS.</abbr> has {toi legomenoi} like the rest, not {toi legomeno}, as stated by Stein.)]</p>
				<p>142 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-142">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ekhomenon, kata ton auton de logon}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> and most Editors have {ekhomenon}. {kata ton auton de logon}; “and this same rule the Persians observe in giving honour.” This, however, makes it difficult (though not impossible) to refer {to ethnos} in the next clause to the Medes, and it can hardly be referred to the Persians, who certainly had not the same system of government. Perhaps however we may translate thus, “for each race extended forward thus their rule or their deputed authority.”]</p>
				<p>143 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-143">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 194.]</p>
				<p>144 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-144">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {polloi}: omitted, or corrected variously, by Editors. There is, perhaps, something wrong about the text in the next clause also, for it seems clear that white doves were not objected to by the Persians. See Stein’s note.]</p>
				<p>145 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-145">return</a>)<br/>
				[ See ch. 95.]</p>
				<p>146 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-146">return</a>)<br/>
				[ These words, “neither those towards the East nor those towards the West” have perhaps been interpolated as an explanation of {ta ano} and {ta kato}. As an explanation they can hardly be correct, but the whole passage is vaguely expressed.]</p>
				<p>147 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-147">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {tropous tesseras paragogeon}.]</p>
				<p>148 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-148">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the Asiatic Ionians who had formed a separate confederacy. Some understand it to mean the Milesians, but this would give no satisfactory connection with what follows.]</p>
				<p>149 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-149">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {pentapolios}.]</p>
				<p>150 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-150">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {exapolios}.]</p>
				<p>151 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-151">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {mesogaioi}. Several of the other cities are at some distance from the coast, but the region is meant in each case rather than the city (hence such forms as {Tritaiees}).]</p>
				<p>152 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-152">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {‘Elikonio}.]</p>
				<p>153 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-153">return</a>)<br/>
				[ This is condemned as an interpolation by some Editors.]</p>
				<p>154 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-154">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {oreon de ekousan ouk omoios}.]</p>
				<p>155 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-155">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {katastas}: cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. 46.]</p>
				<p>156 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-156">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ktesamenoi}: Stein reads {stesamenoi} by conjecture: cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. 58.]</p>
				<p>157 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-157">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {phrontizo me ariston e}. The translation is Rawlinson’s.]</p>
				<p>158 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-158">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {kephale anamaxas}: cp. Hom. Od. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. 92.]</p>
				<p>159 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-159">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {es tous Bragkhidas}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the priests of the temple. The name of the place {Bragkhidai} is feminine, cp. ch. 92.]</p>
				<p>160 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-160">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {onax}, addressing Apollo.]</p>
				<p>161 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-161">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {exaipee tous strouthous k.t.l.} The verb is one which is commonly used of the destruction and depopulation of cities, cp. ch. 176. (Stein.)]</p>
				<p>162 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-162">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {tou de ‘Atarneos toutou esti khoros tes Musies}.]</p>
				<p>163 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-163">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ouk oligoi stadioi}.]</p>
				<p>164 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-164">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {katirosai}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> dedicate it to the king as a token of submission.]</p>
				<p>165 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-165">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> Corsica.]</p>
				<p>166 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-166">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {anaphanenai}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {anaphenai}, which can only be translated by supplying {ton ponton} from {katepontosan}, “till the sea produced it again,” but this is hardly satisfactory.]</p>
				<p>167 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-167">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {Karkhedonioi}.]</p>
				<p>168 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-168">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {elakhon te auton pollo pleious}. Several Editors suppose that words have been lost or that the text is corrupt. I understand it to mean that many more of them fell into the hands of the enemy than were rescued by their own side. Some translate “divided most of them by lot”; but this would be {dielakhon}, and the proceeding would have no object if the prisoners were to be put to death at once. For {pleious} Stein reads {pleistous}.]</p>
				<p>169 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-169">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ton Kurnon⁠ ⁠… ktisai eron eonta, all’ ou ten neson}.]</p>
				<p>170 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-170">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {bouleuterion}.]</p>
				<p>171 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-171">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {outoi}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {outo}.]</p>
				<p>172 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-172">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {autokhthonas epeirotas}.]</p>
				<p>173 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-173">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Many Editors insert {oi} before {tes khores tes spheteres} and alter the punctuation accordingly.]</p>
				<p>174 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-174">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or “all their land came within the isthmus.”]</p>
				<p>175 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-175">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {epectiontes}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {upectiontes}, which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Woods explains to mean “coming forth suddenly.”]</p>
				<p>176 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-176">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {epexelthontes}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {upexelthontes}.]</p>
				<p>177 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-177">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {stadion}, and so throughout.]</p>
				<p>178 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-178">return</a>)<br/>
				[ The “royal cubit” appears to have measured about twenty-one inches.]</p>
				<p>179 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-179">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {tous agkhonas}, the walls on the North and South of the city, called so because built at an angle with the side walls.]</p>
				<p>180 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-180">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {laurai}, “lanes.”]</p>
				<p>181 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-181">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {kai autai}, but perhaps the text is not sound.]</p>
				<p>182 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-182">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {thorex}, as opposed to the inner wall, which would be the {kithon} (cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 139).]</p>
				<p>183 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-183">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {steinoteron}: <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Woods says “of less thickness,” the top of the wall being regarded as a road.]</p>
				<p>184 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-184">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {duo stadion pante}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> 404 yards square.]</p>
				<p>185 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-185">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {tou irou}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the sacred precincts; cp. {en to temenei touto}.]</p>
				<p>186 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-186">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {neos}, the inner house of the temple.]</p>
				<p>187 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-187">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {promantis}.]</p>
				<p>188 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-188">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ta telea ton probaton}.]</p>
				<p>189 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-189">return</a>)<br/>
				[ “at that time.”]</p>
				<p>18901 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-18901">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {katapleontes ton Euphreten}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {katapleontes es ton E}. (It is not true, as stated by Abicht, that the Medicean <abbr>MS.</abbr> omits {es}.)]</p>
				<p>190 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-190">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {oligon ti parateinousa apo tou potamou}.]</p>
				<p>191 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-191">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ou gar ameinon}, an Epic phrase, cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. 71 and 82.]</p>
				<p>192 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-192">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {eskeuasmenos}, a conjectural emendation of {eskeuasmenoisi}, “with provisions well prepared.”]</p>
				<p>193 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-193">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {kateteine skhoinoteneas upodexas diorukhas}. Stein understands {kateteine ten stratien} (resumed afterwards by {diataxas}), “he extended his army, having first marked out channels straight by lines.”]</p>
				<p>194 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-194">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {proesaxanto}, from {proesago}: it may be however from {prosatto}, “they had heaped together provisions for themselves beforehand.”]</p>
				<p>195 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-195">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ten stratien apasan}. Stein thinks that some correction is needed.]</p>
				<p>196 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-196">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {oi d’ an perudontes k.t.l.}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {oud’ an perudontes}, “they would not even have allowed them to enter the city (from the river),” but the negative is awkward referring to the participle alone, and the admission of the enemy to the riverbed within the city would have been an essential part of the scheme, not to be omitted in the description.]</p>
				<p>197 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-197">return</a>)<br/>
				[ The Attic <i>medimnos</i> (= 48 <i>choinikes</i>) was rather less than 12 gallons.]</p>
				<p>198 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-198">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ton tes Demetros karpon}.]</p>
				<p>199 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-199">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Stein supposes that words have fallen out before {ta gar de alla dendrea}, chiefly because some mention of the palm-trees might have been expected here.]</p>
				<p>200 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-200">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {phoinikeious}: some Editors (following Valla) have altered this to {phoinikeiou} (“casks of palm-wine”), but it is not likely that palm-wine would have been thus imported, see ch. 193.]</p>
				<p>201 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-201">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {kai o men eso elkei to plektron o de exo otheei}. I take it to mean that there is one steering-oar on each side, and the “inside” is the side nearer to the bank of the river. The current would naturally run faster on the “outside” and consequently would tend to turn the boat round, and therefore the inside oarsman pulls his oar constantly towards himself and the outside man pushes his oar from himself (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> backs water), to keep the boat straight. Various explanations are given. Stein takes {eso, exo} with the verbs, “one draws the boat towards himself, the other pushes it from himself.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Woods understands that only one oar is used at a time and by two men looking different ways, of whom {o men eso} is he who stands nearest to the side of the boat.]</p>
				<p>202 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-202">return</a>)<br/>
				[ If the talents meant are Euboic, this would be about 170 tons.]</p>
				<p>203 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-203">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {mitresi}: cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 62.]</p>
				<p>204 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-204">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {os an ai parthenoi ginoiato}, equivalent to {osai aei parthenoi ginoiato}, which Stein suggests as a correction.]</p>
				<p>205 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-205">return</a>)<br/>
				[ This sentence, “in order that⁠—city,” is thought by Stein to be either interpolated or misplaced.]</p>
				<p>206 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-206">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {katestekee}: some Editors adopt the correction {katesteke}, “is established.”]</p>
				<p>207 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-207">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {iron}, afterwards called {temenos}.]</p>
				<p>208 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-208">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {panta tropon odon}: some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {odon} for {odon}, and {odon ekhousi} might perhaps mean “afford a passage.” (The reading of the Medicean <abbr>MS.</abbr> is {odon}.)]</p>
				<p>209 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-209">return</a>)<br/>
				[ “I call upon Mylitta against thee”; or perhaps, “I call upon Mylitta to be favourable to thee.”]</p>
				<p>210 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-210">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {aposiosamene te theo}.]</p>
				<p>211 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-211">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {eideos te epammenai eisi kai megatheos}.]</p>
				<p>212 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-212">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {patriai}.]</p>
				<p>213 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-213">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {antion}.]</p>
				<p>214 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-214">return</a>)<br/>
				[ That is perhaps, “if one rows as well as sails,” using oars when the wind is not favourable, cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 11.]</p>
				<p>215 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-215">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {genomene}, or {ginomene}, “which he met with.”]</p>
				<p>216 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-216">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {eonta akharita}: most of the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {ta eonta akharita}, with which reading the sentence would be, “the sufferings which I have, have proved bitter lessons of wisdom to me.”]</p>
				<p>217 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-217">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {me eie}.]</p>
				<p>218 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-218">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {tou katharou stratou}, perhaps “the effective part,” without the encumbrances, cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. 135.]</p>
				<p>219 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-219">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {alexomenous}.]</p>
				<p>220 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-220">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {sagaris nomizontes ekhein}: cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. 5.]</p>
				<p>221 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-221">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {maskhalisteras}.]</p>
				<p>222 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-222">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {thuousi}.]</p>
				<p>223 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-223">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {nomos}: the conjecture {noos}, “meaning,” which is adopted by many Editors, may be right; but {nomos} seems to mean the “customary rule” which determines this form of sacrifice, the rule namely of “swift to the swift.”]</p>
				<!--Book I endnotes end-->
				<!--Book II endnotes begin-->
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-1">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>1 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-1">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Some write “Psammitichos” with less authority.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-2">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>2 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-2">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {tou en Memphi}: many Editors read {en Memphi}, “I heard at Memphis from the priests of Hephaistos,” but with less authority.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-3">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>3 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-3">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {‘Eliou polin} or {‘Elioupolin}, cp. {‘Elioupolitai} below.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-4">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>4 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-4">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {exo e ta ounamata auton mounon}. Some understand “them” to mean “the gods”; rather perhaps the meaning is that accounts of such things will not be related in full, but only touched upon.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-5">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>5 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-5">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ison peri auton epistasthai}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-6">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>6 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-6">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {anthropon}, emphatic, for the rulers before him were gods (ch. 144).]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-7">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>7 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-7">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {Mina}: others read {Mena}, but the authority of the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> is strong for {Mina} both here and in ch. 99.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-8">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>8 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-8">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {tou Thebaikou nomou}, cp. ch. 164.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-9">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>9 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-9">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {tautes on apo}: some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> omit {apo}, “this then is the land for which the sixty <i>schoines</i> are reckoned.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-10">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>10 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-10">return</a>)<br/>
				[ For the measures of length cp. ch. 149. The furlong ({stadion}) is equal to 100 fathoms ({orguiai}), <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> 606 feet 9 inches.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-11">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>11 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-11">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or “without rain”: the word {anudros} is altered by some Editors to {enudros} or {euudros}, “well watered.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-12">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>12 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-12">return</a>)<br/>
				[ I have followed Stein in taking {es ta eiretai} with {legon}, meaning “at the Erythraian Sea,” {taute men} being a repetition of {te men} above. The bend back would make the range double, and hence partly its great breadth. Others translate, “Here (at the quarries) the range stops, and bends round to the parts mentioned (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the Erythraian Sea).”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-13">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>13 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-13">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {os einai Aiguptou}: cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. 81. Others translate, “considering that it belongs to Egypt” (a country so vast), <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> “as measures go in Egypt.” In any case {Aiguptos eousa} just below seems to repeat the same meaning.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-14">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>14 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-14">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Some Editors alter this to “fourteen.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-15">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>15 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-15">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {pentastomou}: some less good <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {eptastomou}, “which has seven mouths.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-16">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>16 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-16">return</a>)<br/>
				[ See note on <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 203.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-17">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>17 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-17">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ton erkhomai lexon}: these words are by many Editors marked as spurious, and they certainly seem to be out of place here.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-18">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>18 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-18">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {kou ge de}: “where then would not a gulf be filled up?”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-19">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>19 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-19">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {katarregnumenen}: some Editors read {katerregmenen} (“broken up by cracks”) from {katerregnumenen}, which is given by many <abbr>MSS.</abbr>]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-1901">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>1901 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-1901">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or possibly “with rock below,” in which case perhaps {upopsammoteren} would mean “rather sandy underneath.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-20">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>20 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-20">return</a>)<br/>
				[ We do not know whether these measurements are in the larger Egyptian cubit of 21 inches or the smaller (equal to the ordinary Hellenic cubit) of 18½ inches, cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 178.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-21">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>21 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-21">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {kai to omoion apodido es auxesin}, “and to yield the like return as regards increased extent.” (<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Woods); but the clause may be only a repetition of the preceding one.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-22">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>22 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-22">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> Zeus.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-23">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>23 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-23">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> of the district of Thebes, the Thebaïs.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-24">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>24 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-24">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {te Libue}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-25">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>25 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-25">return</a>)<br/>
				[ The meaning seems to be this: “The Ionians say that Egypt is the Delta, and at the same time they divide the world into three parts, Europe, Asia, and Libya, the last two being divided from one another by the Nile. Thus they have left out Egypt altogether; and either they must add the Delta as a fourth part of the world, or they must give up the Nile as a boundary. If the name Egypt be extended, as it is by the other Hellenes, to the upper course of the Nile, it is then possible to retain the Nile as a boundary, saying that half of Egypt belongs to Asia and half to Libya, and disregarding the Delta (ch. 17). This also would be an error of reckoning, but less serious than to omit Egypt together.” The reasoning is obscure because it alludes to theories (of Hecataios and other writers) which are presumed to be already known to the reader.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-26">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>26 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-26">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {Katadoupon}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the first cataract.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-27">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>27 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-27">return</a>)<br/>
				[ “and it gives us here, <abbr>etc.</abbr>” ({parekhomenos}).]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-28">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>28 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-28">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {logo de eipein thoumasiotere}. Or perhaps, “and it is more marvellous, so to speak.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-29">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>29 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-29">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ton ta polla esti andri ke k.t.l.} I take {ton} to refer to the nature of the country, as mentioned above; but the use of {os} can hardly be paralleled, and the passage probably requires correction. Some Editors read {ton tekmeria polla esti k.t.l.} “wherein there are many evidences to prove, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>” Stein omits {ton} and alters the punctuation, so that the clauses run thus, “when it flows from the hottest parts to those which for the most part are cooler? For a man who is capable of reasoning about such matters the first and greatest evidence to prove that it is not likely to flow from snow, is afforded by the winds, <abbr>etc.</abbr>”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-30">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>30 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-30">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ouk ekhei elegkhon}, “cannot be refuted” (because we cannot argue with him), cp. Thuc. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. 53, {ta de pseude elegkhon ekhei}. Some translate, “does not prove his case.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-31">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>31 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-31">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {tes arkhaies diexodou}, “his original (normal) course.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-32">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>32 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-32">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ouk eonton anemon psukhron}: the best <abbr>MSS.</abbr> read {kai anemon psukhron} (“and there are cold winds”), which Stein retains, explaining that the cold North winds would assist evaporation.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-33">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>33 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-33">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {autos eoutou peei pollo upodeesteros e tou thereos}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-34">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>34 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-34">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {diakaion ten diexodon auto}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> {to reri}. Some Editors read {autou} (with inferior <abbr>MSS.</abbr>) or alter the word to {eoutou}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-35">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>35 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-35">return</a>)<br/>
				[ “set forth, so far as I understood.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-36">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>36 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-36">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {epi makrotaton}, “carrying the inquiry as far as possible,” cp. ch. 34.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-37">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>37 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-37">return</a>)<br/>
				[ I have little doubt that this means the island of Elephantine; for at this point only would such a mixture of races be found. To this the writer here goes back parenthetically, and then resumes the account of the journey upwards from Tachompso. This view is confirmed by the fact that Strabo relates the same thing with regard to the island of Philai just above Elephantine.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-3701">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>3701 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-3701">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 72, note 86.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-38">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>38 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-38">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {oleureon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-39">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>39 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-39">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {zeias}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-40">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>40 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-40">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the hieratic and the demotic characters.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-41">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>41 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-41">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {murias, os eipein logo}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-42">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>42 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-42">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Referring apparently to <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. 28, where the marks of Apis are given. Perhaps no animal could be sacrificed which had any of these marks.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-43">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>43 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-43">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {kephale keine}, “that head,” cp. {koilien keinen} in the next chapter.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-44">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>44 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-44">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {katharon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-45">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>45 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-45">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {baris}, cp. ch. 96.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-46">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>46 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-46">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or, “descended from Aigyptos.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-4601">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>4601 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-4601">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or, “assuming that in those days as now, they were wont to make voyages, and that some of the Hellenes were seafaring folk.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-47">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>47 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-47">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {stelai}, “upright blocks.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-48">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>48 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-48">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {lampontos tas nuktas megathos}: some Editors alter {megathos} to {megalos} or {mega phos}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-49">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>49 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-49">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {enagizousi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-50">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>50 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-50">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {uon}: some Editors read {oion} “sheep,” on the authority of one <abbr>MS.</abbr>]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-51">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>51 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-51">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ta ounamata}, which means here rather the forms of personification than the actual names.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-52">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>52 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-52">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ai pramanteis}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-53">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>53 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-53">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {phegon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-54">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>54 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-54">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {upo phego pephukuie}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the oak-tree of the legend was a real growing tree, though the dove was symbolical.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-55">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>55 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-55">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {panegurias}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-56">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>56 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-56">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {prosagogas}, with the idea of bringing offerings or introducing persons.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-57">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>57 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-57">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {epoiethesan}, “were first celebrated.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-58">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>58 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-58">return</a>)<br/>
				[ So B.R.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-59">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>59 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-59">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {sumphoiteousi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-5901">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>5901 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-5901">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> 700,000.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-60">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>60 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-60">return</a>)<br/>
				[ See ch. 40.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-61">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>61 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-61">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {tesi thusiesi, en tini nukti}: some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> give {en te nukti}: hence several Editors read {tes thusies en te nukti}, “on the night of the sacrifice.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-62">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>62 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-62">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or, “for what end this night is held solemn by lighting of lamps” (B.R.), making {phos kai timen} one idea.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-63">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>63 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-63">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {alexomenous}: this, which is adopted by most Editors, is the reading of some less good <abbr>MSS.</abbr>; the rest have {alexomenoi}, “strike them and defend themselves.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-6301">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>6301 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-6301">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {eousa e Aiguptos k.t.l.}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {eousa de Aiguptos}: Stein reads {eousa gar Aiguptos}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-64">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>64 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-64">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {theia pregmata katalambanei tous aielourous}, which may mean only, “a marvellous thing happens to the cats.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-65">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>65 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-65">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {es ‘Ermeo polin}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-66">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>66 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-66">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {dikhelon, oplai boos}, “he is cloven-footed, and his foot is that of an ox.” The words {oplai boos} are marked as spurious by Stein.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-67">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>67 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-67">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> above the marshes, cp. ch. 92.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-68">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>68 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-68">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {pante}, which by some is translated “taken all together,” “at most.” Perhaps there is some corruption of text, and the writer meant to say that it measured two cubits by one cubit.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-6801">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>6801 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-6801">return</a>)<br/>
				[ The reading of the Medicean <abbr>MS.</abbr> is {en esti}, not {enesti} as hitherto reported.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-69">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>69 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-69">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or, “calling the song Linos.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-70">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>70 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-70">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ton Linon okothen elabon}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {to ounoma} after {elabon}, but this is omitted by almost all Editors except Stein, who justifies it by a reference to ch. 50, and understands it to mean “the person of Linos.” No doubt the song and the person are here spoken off indiscriminately, but this explanation would require the reading {tou Linou}, as indeed Stein partly admits by suggesting the alteration.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-71">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>71 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-71">return</a>)<br/>
				[ The words “and Bacchic (which are really Egyptian),” are omitted by several of the best <abbr>MSS.</abbr>]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-72">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>72 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-72">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {epezosmenai}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-73">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>73 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-73">return</a>)<br/>
				[ In connection with death apparently, cp. ch. 132, 170. Osiris is meant.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-74">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>74 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-74">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {sindonos bussines}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-75">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>75 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-75">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {to kommi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-76">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>76 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-76">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {nros}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-77">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>77 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-77">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or, “a pleasant sweet taste.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-78">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>78 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-78">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {apala}, “soft.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-79">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>79 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-79">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {kat oligous ton kegkhron}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-80">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>80 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-80">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {apo ton sillikuprion tou karpou}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-81">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>81 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-81">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {zuga}, to tie the sides and serve as a partial deck.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-82">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>82 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-82">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {esti de oud’ outos}: a few <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {ouk} instead of {oud’}, and most Editors follow them. The meaning however seems to be that even here the course in time of flood is different, and much more in the lower parts.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-83">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>83 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-83">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {os apergmenos ree}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> mostly have {os apergmenos reei}, in place of which I have adopted the correction of Stein. Most other Editors read {os apergmenos peei} (following a few inferior <abbr>MSS.</abbr>), “the bend of the Nile which flows thus confined.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-84">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>84 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-84">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Not therefore in the Delta, to which in ch. 15 was assigned a later origin than this.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-85">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>85 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-85">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {kat’ ouden einai lamprotetos}: Stein reads {kai} for {kat’}, thus making the whole chapter parenthetical, with {ou gar elegon} answered by {parameipsamenos on}, a conjecture which is ingenious but not quite convincing.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-86">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>86 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-86">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {stratien pollen labon}: most of the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {ton} after {pollen}, which perhaps indicates that some words are lost.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-87">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>87 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-87">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {kai prosotata}: many <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {kai ou prosotata}, which is defended by some Editors in the sense of a comparative, “and not further.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-88">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>88 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-88">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {Suroi} in the better <abbr>MSS.</abbr>; see note in <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>.6.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-89">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>89 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-89">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {Surioi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-90">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>90 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-90">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {kata tauta}: the better <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {kai kata tauta}, which might be taken with what follows, punctuating after {ergazontai} (as in the Medicean <abbr>MS.</abbr>): “they and the Egyptians alone of all nations work flax; and so likewise they resemble one another in their whole manner of living.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-91">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>91 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-91">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {polon}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the concave sundial, in shape like the vault of heaven.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-92">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>92 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-92">return</a>)<br/>
				[ The gnomon would be an upright staff or an obelisk for observation of the length of the shadow.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-93">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>93 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-93">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> Red Clod.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-94">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>94 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-94">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {Turion stratopedon}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> “the Tyrian quarter” of the town: cp. ch. 154.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-95">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>95 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-95">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ten sen}, or {tauten}, “this land.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-96">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>96 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-96">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {es o meteke auton}, “until at last he dismissed it”; but the construction is very irregular, and there is probably some corruption of text. Stein reads {ekon} by conjecture for {es o}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-97">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>97 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-97">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {delon de kata per epoiese}: a conjectural emendation of {delon de’ kata gar epoiese}, which some editors retain, translating thus, “and this is clear; for according to the manner in which Homer described the wanderings of Alexander, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, it is clear how, <abbr>etc.</abbr>”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-98">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>98 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-98">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Il. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. 289. The sixth book is not ordinarily included in the {Diomedeos aristeia}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-99">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>99 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-99">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Od. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. 227. These references to the Odyssey are by some thought to be interpolations, because they refer only to the visit of Menelaos to Egypt after the fall of Troy; but Herodotus is arguing that Homer, while rejecting the legend of Helen’s stay in Egypt during the war, yet has traces of it left in this later visit to Egypt of Menelaos and Helen, as well as in the visit of Paris and Helen to Sidon.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-100">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>100 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-100">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Od. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. 351.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-101">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>101 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-101">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {kai tode to khorion}: probably {to khorion} ought to be struck out: “this also is evident.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-102">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>102 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-102">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {podeonas}, being the feet of the animals whose skins they were.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-103">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>103 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-103">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 152.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-104">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>104 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-104">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {elasai}, which may be intransitive, “rushed into every kind of evil.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-105">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>105 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-105">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {stadioi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-106">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>106 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-106">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {krossas}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-107">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>107 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-107">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {bomidas}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-108">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>108 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-108">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the three small pyramids just to the East of the great pyramid.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-109">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>109 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-109">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {oute gar k.t.l.}, “for there are no underground chambers,” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Something which was in the mind of the writer has been omitted either by himself or his copyists, “and inferior to it also in other respects, for,” <abbr>etc.</abbr> unless, as Stein supposes, we have here a later addition thrown in without regard to the connection.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-110">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>110 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-110">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {touto megathos}, “as regards attaining the same size,” but probably the text is corrupt. Stein reads {to megathos} in his later editions.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-111">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>111 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-111">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or, “Philition.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-112">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>112 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-112">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {to theo}, the goddess Leto, cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 105.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-113">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>113 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-113">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {suntakhunein auton ton bion}: some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> and Editors read {auto} for {auton}, “that heaven was shortening his life.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-114">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>114 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-114">return</a>)<br/>
				[ More literally, “bidding him take up the blood-money, who would.” The people of Delphi are said to have put Esop to death and to have been ordered by the Oracle to make compensation.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-115">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>115 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-115">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {os an einai ‘Podopin}: so the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> Some Editors read {‘Podopios}, others {‘Podopi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-116">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>116 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-116">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {antion de autout tou neou}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-117">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>117 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-117">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {epaphroditoi ginesthai}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-118">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>118 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-118">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {katekertomese min}: Athenæus says that Sappho attacked the mistress of Charaxos; but here {min} can hardly refer to anyone but Charaxos himself, who doubtless would be included in the same condemnation.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-119">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>119 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-119">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {propulaia}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-120">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>120 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-120">return</a>)<br/>
				[ “innumerable sights of buildings.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-121">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>121 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-121">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {tassomenon}, “posted,” like an army; but the text is probably unsound: so also in the next line, where the better <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {men Boubasti poli}, others {e en Boubasti polis}. Stein reads {e en Boubasti poli}, “the earth at the city of Bubastis.” Perhaps {e en Boubasti polis} might mean the town as opposed to the temple, as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Woods suggests.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-122">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>122 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-122">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Cp. ch. 161, {egeneto apo prophasios, ton k.t.l.} Perhaps however {prophasin} is here from {prophaino} (cp. Soph. Trach. 662), and it means merely “that the gods were foreshowing him this in order that,” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> So Stein.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-123">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>123 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-123">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> for their customary gift or tribute to him as king.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-124">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>124 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-124">return</a>)<br/>
				[ The chronology is inconsistent, and some propose, without authority, to read “three hundred years.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-125">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>125 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-125">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {tas arouras}, cp. ch. 168, where the {aroura} is defined as a hundred Egyptian units square, about three-quarters of an acre.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-126">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>126 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-126">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {es to megaron}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-127">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>127 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-127">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Not on two single occasions, but for two separate periods of time it was stated that the sun had risen in the West and set in the East; <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> from East to West, then from West to East, then again from East to West, and finally back to East again. This seems to be the meaning attached by Herodotus to something which he was told about astronomical cycles.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-128">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>128 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-128">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ouk eontas}: this is the reading of all the best <abbr>MSS.</abbr>, and also fits in best with the argument, which was that in Egypt gods were quite distinct from men. Most Editors however read {oikeontas} on the authority of a few <abbr>MSS.</abbr>, “dwelling with men.” (The reading of the Medicean <abbr>MS.</abbr> is {ouk eontas}, not {oukeontas} as stated by Stein.)]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-129">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>129 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-129">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> that the Hellenes borrowed these divinities from Egypt, see ch. 43 <abbr>ff.</abbr> This refers to all the three gods above mentioned and not (as Stein contended) to Pan and Dionysos only.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-130">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>130 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-130">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {kai toutous allous}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> as well as Heracles; but it may mean “that these also, distinct from the gods, had been born,” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> The connection seems to be this: “I expressed my opinion on all these cases when I spoke of the case of Heracles; for though the statement there about Heracles was in one respect inapplicable to the rest, yet in the main conclusion that gods are not born of men it applies to all.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-131">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>131 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-131">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {stadioi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-132">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>132 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-132">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {mneas}, of which 60 go to the talent.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-133">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>133 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-133">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Cp. ch. 112.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-134">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>134 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-134">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {neos}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-135">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>135 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-135">return</a>)<br/>
				[ I understand that each wall consisted of a single stone, which gave the dimensions each way: “as regards height and length” therefore it was made of a single stone. That it should have been a monolith, except the roof, is almost impossible, not only because of the size mentioned (which in any case is suspicious), but because no one would so hollow out a monolith that it would be necessary afterwards to put on another stone for the roof. The monolith chamber mentioned in ch. 175, which it took three years to convey from Elephantine, measured only 21 cubits by 14 by 8. The {parorophis} or “cornice” is not an “eave projecting four cubits,” but (as the word is explained by Pollux) a cornice between ceiling and roof, measuring in this instance four cubits in height and formed by the thickness of the single stone: see Letronne, Recherches pour servir, <abbr>etc.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 80 (quoted by Bähr).]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-136">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>136 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-136">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {erpase}, “took as plunder.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-137">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>137 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-137">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {aparti}: this word is not found in any <abbr>MS.</abbr> but was read here by the Greek grammarians.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-13701">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>13701 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-13701">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> 120,000.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-138">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>138 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-138">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. 159.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-139">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>139 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-139">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {kuneen}, perhaps the royal helmet or <i>Pschent</i>, cp. ch. 151.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-140">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>140 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-140">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {apemataise}, euphemism for breaking wind.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-141">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>141 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-141">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {oudena logon auto donta}: many Editors change {auto} to {eouto}, in which case it means “taking no time to consider the matter,” as elsewhere in Herodotus; but cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. 50 {istoreonti logon audena edidou}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-142">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>142 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-142">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {nomon}, and so throughout the passage.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-14201">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>14201 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-14201">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> 160,000.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-14202">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>14202 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-14202">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> 250,000.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-143">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>143 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-143">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {arourai}, cp. ch. 141.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-144">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>144 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-144">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ekaston}: if {ekastoi} be read (for which there is more <abbr>MS.</abbr> authority) the meaning will be that “a thousand Calasirians and a thousand Hermotybians acted as guards alternately, each for a year,” the number at a time being 1000 not 2000.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-14401">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>14401 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-14401">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {pente mneai}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-145">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>145 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-145">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {arusteres},={kotulai}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-146">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>146 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-146">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {tou neou}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-147">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>147 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-147">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {e trokhoiedes kaleomene}, “the Wheel.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-148">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>148 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-148">return</a>)<br/>
				[ The last words, “and when⁠—again,” are not found in the best <abbr>MSS.</abbr>, and are omitted by Stein. However their meaning, if not expressed, is implied.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-149">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>149 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-149">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {pugonos}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-150">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>150 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-150">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {tou autou eontes lithou}: some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> and many Editors have {Aithiopikou} for {tou autou}, “of Ethiopian stone.” For {eontes} the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {eontos}, which may be right, referring to {tou bathrou} understood, “the base being made of,” <abbr>etc.</abbr>]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-151">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>151 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-151">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {tou megalou}, a conjecture founded upon Valla’s version, which has been confirmed by a <abbr>MS.</abbr> The other <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {tou megarou}, which is retained by some Editors, “on each side of the sanctuary.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-152">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>152 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-152">return</a>)<br/>
				[ “are claiming a share when no part in it belongs to them.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-153">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>153 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-153">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or possibly of alum: but the gift seems a very small one in any case. Some propose to read {eikosi mneas khrusou}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-154">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>154 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-154">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or, according to a few <abbr>MSS.</abbr>, “Battos the son of Arkesilaos.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link2note-155">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>155 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link2noteref-155">return</a>)<br/>
				[ “thou hast surely perished.”]</p>
				<!--Book II endnotes end-->
				<!--Book III endnotes begin-->
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-1">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>1 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-1">return</a>)<br/>
				[ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 1.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-2">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>2 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-2">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {‘Amasin}. This accusative must be taken with {eprexe}. Some Editors adopt the conjecture {‘Amasi}, to be taken with {memphomenos} as in ch. 4, “did this because he had a quarrel with Amasis.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-3">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>3 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-3">return</a>)<br/>
				[ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 152, 154.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-4">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>4 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-4">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {Suron}: see <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 104.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-5">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>5 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-5">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {keinon}: most <abbr>MSS.</abbr> and many editions have {keimenon}, “laid up.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-6">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>6 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-6">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {demarkhon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-7">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>7 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-7">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {exaireomenos}: explained by some “disembarked” or “unloaded.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-8">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>8 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-8">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or “Orotal.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-9">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>9 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-9">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {dia de touton}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-10">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>10 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-10">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {trion}: omitted by some good <abbr>MSS.</abbr>]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-11">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>11 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-11">return</a>)<br/>
				[ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 169.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-12">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>12 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-12">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {alla kai tote uathesan ai Thebai psakadi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-13">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>13 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-13">return</a>)<br/>
				[ The so-called {Leukon teikhon} on the south side of Memphis: cp. ch. 91.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-14">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>14 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-14">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {omoios kai} omitting {a}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-15">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>15 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-15">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {pentakosias mneas}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-16">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>16 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-16">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {aneklaion}: perhaps {anteklaion}, which has most <abbr>MS.</abbr> authority, may be right, “answer their lamentations.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-17">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>17 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-17">return</a>)<br/>
				[ See ch. 31.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-18">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>18 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-18">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {egeomenon}: some Editors adopt the conjecture {agomenon}, “was being led.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-19">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>19 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-19">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {sphi}: so in the <abbr>MSS.</abbr>: some editions (following the Aldine) have {oi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-20">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>20 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-20">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {to te}: a correction for {tode}: some Editors read {tode, to}, “by this, namely by the case of,” <abbr>etc.</abbr>]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-21">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>21 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-21">return</a>)<br/>
				[ “gypsum.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-22">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>22 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-22">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {epi}, lit. “after.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-23">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>23 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-23">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {leukon tetragonon}: so the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> Some Editors, in order to bring the statement of Herodotus into agreement with the fact, read {leukon ti trigonon}, “a kind of white triangle”: so Stein.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-24">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>24 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-24">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {epi}: this is altered unnecessarily by most recent Editors to {upo}, on the authority of Eusebius and Pliny, who say that the mark was under the tongue.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-25">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>25 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-25">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ekeino}: some understand this to refer to Cambyses, “that there was no one now who would come to the assistance of Cambyses, if he were in trouble,” an office which would properly have belonged to Smerdis, cp. ch. 65: but the other reference seems more natural.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-26">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>26 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-26">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Epilepsy or something similar.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-2601">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>2601 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-2601">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Cp. note on <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 114.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-27">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>27 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-27">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {pros ton patera [telesai] Kuron}: the word {telesai} seems to be corrupt. Stein suggests {eikasai}, “as compared with.” Some Editors omit the word.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-28">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>28 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-28">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {nomon panton basilea pheras einai}: but {nomos} in this fragment of Pindar is rather the natural law by which the strong prevail over the weak.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-29">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>29 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-29">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {iakhon}: Stein reads by conjecture {skhon}, “having obtained possession.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-30">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>30 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-30">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {mede}: Abicht reads {meden} by conjecture.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-31">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>31 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-31">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {alla}, under the influence of the preceding negative.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-32">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>32 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-32">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {prosson} refers grammatically only to {autos}, and marks the reference as being chiefly to himself throughout the sentence.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-33">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>33 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-33">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {prorrizos}, “by the roots.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-34">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>34 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-34">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {toi tesi pathesi}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> mostly have {toi autaisi} or {toiautaisi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-35">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>35 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-35">return</a>)<br/>
				[ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 51.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-36">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>36 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-36">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {es Aigupton epetheke}, “delivered it (to a messenger to convey) to Egypt.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-37">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>37 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-37">return</a>)<br/>
				[ The island of Carpathos, the modern <i>Scarpanto</i>.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-38">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>38 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-38">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {to thulako periergasthai}: which is susceptible of a variety of meanings. In a similar story told of the Chians the Spartans are made to say that it would have been enough to show the empty bag without saying anything. (Sext. Empir. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 23.) Probably the meaning here is that if they were going to say so much, they need not have shown the bag, for the words were enough without the sight of the bag: or it may be only that the <i>words</i> {o thulakos} were unnecessary in the sentence {o thulakos alphiton deitai}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-39">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>39 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-39">return</a>)<br/>
				[ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 70.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-40">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>40 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-40">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {genee}. To save the chronology some insert {trite} before {genee}, but this will be useless unless the clause {kata de ton auton khronon tou kreteros te arpage} be omitted, as it is also proposed to do. Periander is thought to have died about 585 <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr>; but see <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. 95.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-41">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>41 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-41">return</a>)<br/>
				[ The <abbr>MSS.</abbr> add {eontes eoutoisi}, and apparently something has been lost. Stein and others follow Valckenär in adding {suggenees}, “are ever at variance with one another in spite of their kinship.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-42">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>42 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-42">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {noo labon}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {now labon kai touto}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-43">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>43 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-43">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {iren zemien}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-44">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>44 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-44">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {tauta ta nun ekhon presseis}: the form of sentence is determined by its antithesis to {ta agatha ta nun ego ekho}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-45">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>45 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-45">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {basileus}, because already destined as his father’s successor.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-46">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>46 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-46">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {sphea}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {sphe} here, and in the middle of the next chapter.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-4601">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>4601 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-4601">return</a>)<br/>
				[ The Lacedemonians who were not Dorians had of course taken part in the Trojan war.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-47">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>47 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-47">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {leuka genetai}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-48">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>48 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-48">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {prutaneia}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-49">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>49 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-49">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {lokhon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-50">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>50 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-50">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {prosiskhon}: some read {proseskhon}, “had put in.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-51">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>51 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-51">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {kai ton tes Diktunes neon}: omitted by some Editors.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-52">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>52 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-52">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {orguias}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-53">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>53 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-53">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {stadioi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-54">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>54 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-54">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {kai}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {kata}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-55">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>55 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-55">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {en te gar anthropeie phusi ouk enen ara}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-56">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>56 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-56">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or possibly, “the most necessary of those things which remain to be done, is this.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-57">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>57 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-57">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {apistie polle upekekhuto}, cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 152.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-58">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>58 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-58">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or perhaps Phaidymia.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-59">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>59 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-59">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {Gobrues} or {Gobrues}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-60">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>60 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-60">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {‘Intaphrenea}: this form, which is given by at least one <abbr>MS.</abbr> throughout, seems preferable, as being closer to the Persian name which it represents, “Vindafrana,” cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. 25. Most of the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {‘Intaphernea}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-61">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>61 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-61">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {phthas emeu}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-62">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>62 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-62">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ti}: some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {tis}, “in order that persons may trust (themselves) to them more.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-63">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>63 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-63">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> “let him be killed on the spot.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-64">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>64 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-64">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ta panta muria}, “ten thousand of every possible thing,” (or, “of all the usual gifts”; cp. ch. 84 {ten pasan doreen}).]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-65">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>65 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-65">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {dethen}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-66">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>66 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-66">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {oideonton ton pregmaton}: “while things were swelling,” cp. ch. 127: perhaps here, “before things came to a head.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-6601">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>6601 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-6601">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {andreona}, as in ch. 121.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-67">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>67 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-67">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ana te edramon palin}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> they ran back into the room out of which they had come to see what was the matter; with this communicated a bedchamber which had its light only by the open door of communication.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-6701">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>6701 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-6701">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {magophonia}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-68">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>68 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-68">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or, “after it had lasted more than five days,” taking {thorubos} as the subject of {egeneto}. The reason for mentioning the particular number five seems to be contained in the passage quoted by Stein from Sextus Empiricus, {enteuphen kai oi Person kharientes nomon ekhousi, basileos par’ autois teleutesantos pente tas ephexes emeras anomian agein}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-69">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>69 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-69">return</a>)<br/>
				[ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. 43.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-70">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>70 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-70">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {isonomie}, “equal distribution,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> of civil rights.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-71">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>71 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-71">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ouden oikeion}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {ouden oud’ oikeion}, which might be translated “anything of its own either.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-72">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>72 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-72">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {to lego}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {ton lego}, “each of the things <i>about which I speak</i> being best in its own kind.” The reading {to logo}, which certainly gives a more satisfactory meaning, is found in Stobæus, who quotes the passage.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-73">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>73 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-73">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {kakoteta}, as opposed to the {arete} practised by the members of an aristocracy.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-74">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>74 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-74">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {okto kaiebdomekonta mneas}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {ebdomekonta mneas} only, and this reading seems to have existed as early as the second century of our era: nevertheless the correction is required, not only by the facts of the case, but also by comparison with ch. 95.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-75">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>75 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-75">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {nomos}, and so throughout.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-76">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>76 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-76">return</a>)<br/>
				[ or “Hygennians.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-77">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>77 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-77">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the Cappadokians, see <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 6.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-7701">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>7701 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-7701">return</a>)<br/>
				[ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 149.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-78">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>78 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-78">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {muriadas}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {muriasi}. With {muriadas} we must supply {medimnon}. The {medimnos} is really about a bushel and a half.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-79">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>79 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-79">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {Pausikai}: some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {Pausoi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-80">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>80 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-80">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {tous anaspastous kaleomenous}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-81">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>81 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-81">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {Kaspioi}: some read by conjecture {Kaspeiroi}, others {Kasioi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-82">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>82 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-82">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ogdokonta kai oktakosia kai einakiskhilia}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {tesserakonta kai pentakosia kai einakiskhilia} (9540), which is irreconcilable with the total sum given below, and also with the sum obtained by adding up the separate items given in Babylonian talents, whether we reduce them by the proportion 70:60 given by the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> in ch. 89, or by the true proportion 78:60. On the other hand the total sum given below is precisely the sum of the separate items (after subtracting the 140 talents used for the defence of Kilikia), reduced in the proportion 78:60; and this proves the necessity of the emendation here ({thop} for {thphm}) as well as supplying a strong confirmation of that adopted in ch. 89.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-83">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>83 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-83">return</a>)<br/>
				[ The reckoning throughout is in round numbers, nothing less than the tens being mentioned.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-84">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>84 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-84">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {oi peri te Nusen}: perhaps this should be corrected to {oi te peri Nusen}, because the {sunamphoteroi} which follows seem to refer to two separate peoples.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-85">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>85 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-85">return</a>)<br/>
				[ The passage “these Ethiopians⁠—dwellings” is marked by Stein as doubtful on internal grounds. The Callantian Indians mentioned seem to be the same as the Callantians mentioned in ch. 38.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-86">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>86 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-86">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {khoinikas}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-87">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>87 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-87">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {dia penteteridos}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-88">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>88 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-88">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the Indus.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-89">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>89 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-89">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Either {auton tekomenon} is to be taken absolutely, equivalent to {autou tekomenou}, and {ta krea} is the subject of {diaphtheiresthai}; or {auton} is the subject and {ta krea} is accusative of definition, “wasting away in his flesh.” Some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {diaphtheirein}, “that he is spoiling his flesh for them.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-90">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>90 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-90">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {gar}: some would read {de}, but the meaning seems to be, “this is done universally, for in the case of weakness arising from old age, the same takes place.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-91">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>91 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-91">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {pros arktou te kai boreo anemou}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-92">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>92 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-92">return</a>)<br/>
				[ This clause indicates the manner in which the size is so exactly known.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-93">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>93 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-93">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {autoi}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> in themselves as well as in their habits. Some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> read {to} for {autoi}, which is adopted by several Editors; others adopt the conjecture {autois}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-94">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>94 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-94">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> two in each hind-leg.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-95">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>95 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-95">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {kai paraluesthai}: {kai} is omitted in some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> and by some Editors.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-96">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>96 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-96">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ouk omou}: some Editors omit {ouk}: the meaning seems to be that in case of necessity they are thrown off one after another to delay the pursuing animals.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-97">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>97 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-97">return</a>)<br/>
				[ The meaning of the passage is doubtful: possibly it should be translated (omitting {kai}) “the male camels, being inferior in speed to the females, flag in their course and are dragged along, first one and then the other.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-9701">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>9701 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-9701">return</a>)<br/>
				[ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 75.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-98">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>98 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-98">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {metri}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {metre}, “womb,” but for this Herod. seems to use the plural.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-99">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>99 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-99">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {metera}: most <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {metran}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-100">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>100 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-100">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Most of the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {auton} before {ta melea}, which by some Editors is omitted, and by others altered to {autika}. If {auton} is to stand it must be taken with {katapetomenas}, “flying down upon them,” and so it is punctuated in the Medicean <abbr>MS.</abbr>]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-101">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>101 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-101">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {elkea}. There is a play upon the words {epelkein} and {elkea} which can hardly be reproduced in translation.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-102">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>102 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-102">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {Kassiteridas}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-103">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>103 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-103">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {o kassiteros}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-104">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>104 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-104">return</a>)<br/>
				[ cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. 13.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-105">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>105 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-105">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {akinakea}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-106">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>106 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-106">return</a>)<br/>
				[ This is the second of the satrapies mentioned in the list, see ch. 90, named from its chief town. Oroites also possessed himself of the first satrapy, of which the chief town was Magnesia (ch. 122), and then of the third (see ch. 127).]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-107">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>107 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-107">return</a>)<br/>
				[ The satrapy of Daskyleion is the third in the list, see ch. 90.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-108">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>108 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-108">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {su gar en andron logo}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-109">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>109 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-109">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or, “banqueting hall,” cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. 95.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-110">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>110 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-110">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {apestrammenon}: most of the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {epestrammenon}, “turned towards (the wall).”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-11001">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>11001 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-11001">return</a>)<br/>
				[ “whenever he (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> Zeus) rained.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-111">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>111 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-111">return</a>)<br/>
				[ This clause, “as Amasis the king of Egypt had foretold to him,” is omitted in some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> and by some Editors.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-112">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>112 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-112">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {oideonton eti ton pregmaton}: cp. ch. 76.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-113">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>113 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-113">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> satrapies: see ch. 89, 90.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-114">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>114 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-114">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {apikomenon kai anakomisthenton}: the first perhaps referring to the slaves and the other to the rest of the property.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-115">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>115 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-115">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the art of evasion.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-116">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>116 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-116">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {es tou khrosou ten theken}: {es} is not in the <abbr>MSS.</abbr>, which have generally {tou khrusou sun theke}: one only has {tou khrusou ten theken}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-117">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>117 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-117">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {stateras}: <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the {stater Dareikos} “Daric,” worth about £1; cp. note on <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 28.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-118">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>118 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-118">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ekaton mneon}, “a hundred minae,” of which sixty go to the talent.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-119">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>119 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-119">return</a>)<br/>
				[ This passage, from “for this event happened” to the end of the chapter, is suspected as an interpolation by some Editors, on internal grounds.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-120">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>120 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-120">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Tarentum. Italy means for Herodotus the southern part of the peninsula only.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-121">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>121 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-121">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {restones}: so one inferior <abbr>MS.</abbr>, probably by conjectural emendation: the rest have {krestones}. The Ionic form however of {rastone} would be {reistone}. Some would read {khrestones}, a word which is not found, but might mean the same as {kresmosunes} (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. 33), “in consequence of the <i>request</i> of Demokedes.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-122">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>122 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-122">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {kat’ emporien strateuomenoi}: some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> read {kat’ emporien, oi de strateuomenoi}, “some for trade, others serving in the army.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-123">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>123 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-123">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {prothura}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-124">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>124 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-124">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {e ’tis e oudeis}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-125">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>125 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-125">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {isonomien}: see ch. 80, note.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-126">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>126 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-126">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {all’ oud’ axios eis su ge}. Maiandrios can claim no credit or reward for giving up that of which by his own unworthiness he would in any case have been deprived.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-127">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>127 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-127">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ou de ti}: some read {oud’ eti} or {ou de eti}, “no longer kept the purpose.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-128">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>128 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-128">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {en gorgure}: the word also means a “sewer” or “conduit.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-129">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>129 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-129">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {prosempikraneesthai emellon toisi Samioisi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-130">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>130 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-130">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {tous diphrophoreumenous}: a doubtful word: it seems to be a sort of title belonging to Persians of a certain rank, perhaps those who were accompanied by men to carry seats for them, the same as the {thronoi} mentioned in ch. 144; or, “those who were borne in litters.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-131">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>131 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-131">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {sageneusantes}: see <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. 31. The word is thought by Stein to have been interpolated here.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-132">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>132 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-132">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or, “are very highly accounted and tend to advancement.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-133">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>133 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-133">return</a>)<br/>
				[ “opposite to.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link32Hnote-134">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>134 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link32noteref-134">return</a>)<br/>
				[ The words “and to the Persians” are omitted in some MSS.]</p>
				<!--Book III endnotes end-->
				<!--Book IV endnotes begin-->
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-1">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>1 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-1">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Some enterprises had been entrusted to others, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> the attack on Samos; but this had not been the case with the capture of Babylon, therefore some Editors have proposed corrections, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> {au tou} (Schweighäuser), and {autika} (Stein).]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-2">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>2 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-2">return</a>)<br/>
				[ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 106.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-3">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>3 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-3">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {tes ano ‘Asies}: this means Eastern Asia as distinguished from the coasts of Asia Minor; see <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 103 and 177.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-4">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>4 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-4">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {katapausantes}: the expression is awkward if meant to be equivalent to {kai katepausan}, but it is hardly improved by the alteration to {katapausontes}. Perhaps the clause is out of place.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-5">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>5 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-5">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ponos}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-6">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>6 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-6">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {peristixantes}: so the two best <abbr>MSS.</abbr>; others have {peristesantes} or {peristexantes}. The word {peristixantes} would be from {peristikho}, equivalent to {peristikhizo}, and is acknowledged in this sense by Hesychius.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-7">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>7 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-7">return</a>)<br/>
				[ The connection is not clear either at the beginning of the chapter or here. This clause would seem to be a repetition of that at the beginning of the chapter, and that which comes between should be an explanation of the reason why the slaves are blinded. As it stands, however, we can only refer it to the clause which follows, {ou gar arotai eisi alla nomades}, and even so there is no real solution of the difficulty, for it is not explained why nomads should have blinded slaves. Perhaps the best resource is to suppose that some part of the explanation, in connection with the manner of dealing with the milk, has been lost.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-8">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>8 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-8">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {te per}: a conjectural emendation for {e per}, “which is a very great lake.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-9">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>9 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-9">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {epi touton arkhonton}: the word {arkhonton} is omitted in some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> and by some Editors.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-10">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>10 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-10">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {sagarin}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-11">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>11 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-11">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {tous basileious}: so Wesseling. The <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {tous basileas}, “the kings,” which may perhaps be used here as equivalent to {tous basileious}: some Editors, including Stein, adopt the conjecture {tou basileos}, “from the youngest of them who, was king, those who,” <abbr>etc.</abbr>]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-12">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>12 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-12">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {tou basileos}: some Editors read by conjecture {Skolotou basileos}, “after their king Scolotos.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-1201">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>1201 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-1201">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {katazonnumenon}: or {kata tade zonnumenon}, “girded in this manner.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-13">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>13 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-13">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {mekhanesasthai ten metera Skuthe}: the better <abbr>MSS.</abbr> read {mekhanasthai} and {Skuthen}: the meaning seems doubtful, and some Editors would omit the clause as an interpolation.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-14">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>14 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-14">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {pros pollous deomenon}: the better <abbr>MSS.</abbr> read {pro pollou deomena}. The passage has been emended in various ways, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> {pros pollous deoi menontas} (Buttmann), {pros pollous menontas} (Bredow), {pro spodou deomenon} (Stein).]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-15">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>15 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-15">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {poiesas}: some authorities have {eipas}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-16">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>16 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-16">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Italy means for Herodotus only the Southern part of the peninsula.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-17">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>17 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-17">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {diekosioisi}: so the best authorities; others have {priekosioisi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-18">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>18 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-18">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {‘Italioteon}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> Hellenic settlers in Italy.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-19">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>19 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-19">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {to agalmati to ‘Apollonos}: {agalma} is used for anything dedicated to a god, most commonly the sacred image.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-20">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>20 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-20">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {katuperthe}: “above,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> beyond them towards the North. Similarly when dealing with Libya the writer uses the same word of those further from the coast towards the South; see ch. 174.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-21">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>21 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-21">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {en autoisi toisi epesi poieon}: “even in the verses which he composed,” in which he might be expected as a poet to go somewhat beyond the literal truth.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-22">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>22 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-22">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or, “Alizonians.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-23">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>23 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-23">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {‘Olbiopolitas}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-24">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>24 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-24">return</a>)<br/>
				[ See ch. 101, where the day’s journey is reckoned at 200 stades (23 English miles).]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-25">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>25 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-25">return</a>)<br/>
				[ The meaning of {eremos} here is not waste and barren land, but land without settled inhabitants.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-26">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>26 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-26">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> “Man-eaters.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-27">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>27 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-27">return</a>)<br/>
				[ This is the reading of the <abbr>MSS.</abbr>, but it is not consistent with the distance given in ch. 101, nor with the actual facts: some Editors therefore read “four” instead of “fourteen.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-28">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>28 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-28">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> “Cliffs.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-29">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>29 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-29">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> “Black-cloaks.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-30">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>30 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-30">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {‘Argippaioi}: it is not certain that this is the form which ought to be read here: Latin writers make the name “Arimphaei,” and in some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> it is given here as {‘Orgempaioi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-31">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>31 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-31">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {agalmati}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-32">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>32 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-32">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ta genesia}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-33">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>33 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-33">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or, “violent.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-34">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>34 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-34">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Od. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. 85.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-35">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>35 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-35">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {e phuonta phuein mogis}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-36">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>36 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-36">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {prosthekas}, “additions.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-37">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>37 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-37">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> of Apollo and Artemis.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-3701">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>3701 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-3701">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Omitting {legon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-38">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>38 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-38">return</a>)<br/>
				[ The word “Asia” is not contained in the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> and need not be inserted in the text, but it is implied, if not expressed; see <abbr>chap.</abbr> 41.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-39">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>39 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-39">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {aktai}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-40">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>40 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-40">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ou legousa ei me nomo}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-41">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>41 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-41">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> 100,000 fathoms, equivalent to 1000 stades; see <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 6, note 10.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-42">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>42 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-42">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {oude sumballein axie}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-43">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>43 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-43">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 158.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-4301">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>4301 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-4301">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {brota}: some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {probata} “cattle.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-44">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>44 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-44">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {omoia parekhomene}: the construction is confused, but the meaning is that all but the Eastern parts are known to be surrounded by sea.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-45">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>45 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-45">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {logion}: some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {logimon}, “of reputation.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-46">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>46 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-46">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Stein reads {eisi de} for {eisi de}, and punctuates so that the meaning is, “it has become the greatest of all rivers in the following manner:⁠—besides other rivers which flow into it, those which especially make it great are as follows.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-47">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>47 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-47">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {pente men oi}: this perhaps requires emendation, but the corrections proposed are hardly satisfactory, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> {pente megaloi} or {pente monoi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-48">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>48 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-48">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or “Skios”: called by Thucydides “Oskios” (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 96).]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-49">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>49 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-49">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {eti}: most of the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> give {esti}, which is adopted by some Editors.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-50">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>50 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-50">return</a>)<br/>
				[ “Sacred Ways.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-51">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>51 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-51">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {Gerreon}: in some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> {Gerrou}, “the region called Gerros.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-52">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>52 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-52">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {tesserakonta}: some Editors have altered this number, but without authority or sufficient reason.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-53">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>53 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-53">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {di eremou}: see note 25 on ch. 18. The region here spoken of is that between the Gerrians and the agricultural Scythians.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-5301">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>5301 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-5301">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {es touto elos}: <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the Dneiper-Liman. (The Medicean and Florentine <abbr>MSS.</abbr> read {es to elos}, not {es to telos}, as hitherto reported.)]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-54">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>54 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-54">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {eon embolon tes khores}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-55">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>55 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-55">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {Metros}: <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the Mother of the gods, Kybele, cp. ch. 76; some less good authorities have {Demetros}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-56">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>56 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-56">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {reei de}: most <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {reei men gar}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-57">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>57 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-57">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or, “Apia.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-58">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>58 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-58">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or, “Goitosyros.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-59">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>59 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-59">return</a>)<br/>
				[ The <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have also “Arippasa” and “Artimpasa.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-60">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>60 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-60">return</a>)<br/>
				[ The authorities have also “Thagimasa” and “Thamimasidas.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-61">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>61 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-61">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ton arkheion}: some read by conjecture {en to arkheio}, “at the seat of government,” or “in the public place.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-62">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>62 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-62">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {eson t’ epi stadious treis}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-63">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>63 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-63">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {upo ton kheimonon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-64">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>64 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-64">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {akinakes}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-65">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>65 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-65">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {agalma}: see note 19 on ch. 15.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-66">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>66 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-66">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {kata per baitas}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-67">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>67 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-67">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or, “and put them together in one bundle.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-68">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>68 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-68">return</a>)<br/>
				[ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 105.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-69">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>69 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-69">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {kuperou}: it is not clear what plant is meant.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-70">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>70 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-70">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> for this purpose. The general use of bronze is attested by ch. 81.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-71">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>71 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-71">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ode anabibazontes, epean k.t.l}: the reference of {ode} is directly to the clause {epean⁠—⁠trakhelou}, though in sense it refers equally to the following, {katothen de k.t.l}. Some Editors punctuate thus, {ode anabibazontes epean} and omit {de} after {katothen}, making the reference of {ode} to the latter clause alone.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-72">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>72 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-72">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {oruontai}, as in <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. 117, but here they howl for pleasure.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-73">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>73 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-73">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Like the Egyptians for example, cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 91.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-74">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>74 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-74">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {mete ge on allelon}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {me ti ge on allelon}. Most Editors read {allon} for {allelon} and alter the other words in various ways ({me toi ge on, me toigaron} <abbr>etc.</abbr>), taking {me} as in {me oti} (<i>ne dicam aliorum</i>). The reading which I have adopted is based on that of Stein, who reads {mete teon allon} and quotes <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 142, {oute ge alloisi ‘Ellenon oudamoisi, umin de de kai dia panton ekista}. With {allon} the meaning is, “rejecting those of other nations and especially those of the Hellenes.” For the use of {me} after {pheugein} cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 91.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-75">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>75 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-75">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or, according to some <abbr>MSS.</abbr>, “as they proved in the case of Anacharsis and afterwards of Skyles.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-76">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>76 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-76">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {gen pollen}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-77">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>77 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-77">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {epitropou}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-78">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>78 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-78">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {peplastai}: some authorities give {pepaistai}, “has been invented as a jest.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-79">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>79 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-79">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {es kheiras agesthai}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-7901">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>7901 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-7901">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {o theos}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-80">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>80 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-80">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {diepresteuse}: this or {epresteuse} is the reading of most of the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> The meaning is uncertain, since the word does not occur elsewhere. Stein suggests that it may mean “scoffed (at the Scythians).” Various conjectures have been tried, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> {diedresteuse}, {diedrepeteuse}, <abbr>etc.</abbr>]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-81">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>81 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-81">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {os Skuthas einai}: cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 8. Some (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> Dindorf and Bähr) translate “considering that they are Scythians,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> for a nation so famous and so widely extended.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-82">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>82 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-82">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> about 5300 gallons.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-83">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>83 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-83">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {epi to iro}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> mostly have {epi iro}, and Stein adopts the conjecture {epi rio}, “on a projecting point.” The temple would be that of {Zeus ourios} mentioned in ch. 87. (In the Medicean <abbr>MS.</abbr> the omitted {<span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>} is inserted above the line <i>before</i>the {r}, not directly over it, as represented by Stein, and the accent is not omitted.)]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-84">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>84 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-84">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {stadioi}, and so throughout.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-85">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>85 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-85">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> 1,110,000.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-86">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>86 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-86">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> 330,000.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-8601">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>8601 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-8601">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {stelas}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> “square blocks”; so also in ch. 91.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-87">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>87 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-87">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> 700,000.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-8701">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>8701 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-8701">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {os emoi dokeei sumballomeno}, “putting the evidence together.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-88">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>88 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-88">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {pasi deka}: probably a loose expression like {ta panta muria}, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. 74.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-89">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>89 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-89">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {psoren}, “mange.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-90">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>90 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-90">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or (less probably) “Skyrmiadai.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-91">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>91 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-91">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {Salmoxin}: some inferior <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {Zalmoxin}, or {Zamolxin}, and the spelling in other writers varies between these forms.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-92">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>92 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-92">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {daimona}, sometimes used for deified men as distinguished from gods, cp. ch. 103.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-93">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>93 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-93">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {dia penteteridos}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-94">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>94 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-94">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {bathutera}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-95">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>95 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-95">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ou to asthenestato sophiste}. No depreciation seems to be intended here.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-96">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>96 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-96">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {andreona}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-97">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>97 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-97">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the Mediterranean: or the passage may mean simply, “Thrace runs out further into the sea than Scythia.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-98">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>98 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-98">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {gounon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-99">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>99 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-99">return</a>)<br/>
				[ More literally, “I say this, so far as it is allowed to compare, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Such is the form of the Tauric land.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-100">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>100 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-100">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ede}. The Agathyrsians however have not been mentioned before in this connection.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-101">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>101 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-101">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {stadia}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-102">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>102 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-102">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {tes Skuthikes ta epikarsia}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the lines running from West to East.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-103">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>103 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-103">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {epanakhthentes}: so the Medicean <abbr>MS.</abbr> and another: the rest have {epanakhthentas}. Some Editors read by conjecture {apeneikhthentas}, “cast away on their coast.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-104">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>104 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-104">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {neoisi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-105">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>105 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-105">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {trieteridas}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-106">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>106 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-106">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or, “were driven out.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-107">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>107 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-107">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {phtheirotrageousi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-108">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>108 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-108">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or, “<i>Aiorpata</i>,” and “<i>aior</i>” below.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-109">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>109 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-109">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the Royal Scythians: see ch. 20.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-110">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>110 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-110">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {epi touto}, the reading of the Aldine edition. The <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {epi touto}. Stein suggests {dia touto}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-111">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>111 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-111">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ou peisometha}: some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> read {ouk oisometha}. Editors have emended by conjecture in various ways, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> {ou periopsometha}, “we shall not allow it”; {oi epoisometha} or {oi epeisometha}, “we shall go out to attack him”; {aposometha}, “we shall repel him.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-112">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>112 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-112">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {paras}, or {pasai}, belonging to {gunaikes}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-113">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>113 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-113">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {khersou}, “dry.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-114">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>114 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-114">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Perhaps the same as the “Hyrgis” mentioned in ch. 57. Some Editors read “Hyrgis” in this passage.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-115">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>115 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-115">return</a>)<br/>
				[ See ch. 119.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-116">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>116 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-116">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {klaiein lego}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-117">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>117 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-117">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {touto esti e apo Skutheon resis}: this refers to the last words, {klaiein lego}. Most Editors have doubts about the genuineness of the sentence, regarding it a marginal gloss which has crept into the text; but perhaps without sufficient reason.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-118">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>118 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-118">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or, “with some slight effect on the course of the war.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-119">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>119 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-119">return</a>)<br/>
				[ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 216.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-120">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>120 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-120">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {eremothentes tou omilou}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-121">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>121 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-121">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {iesan tes phones}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-122">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>122 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-122">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {e mia kai Sauromatai}: some Editors read {e meta Sauromateon}. The <abbr>MSS.</abbr> give {e mia Sauromatai} (some {Sauromateon}). Stein inserts {kai}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-123">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>123 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-123">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {khairontes eleutheroi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-124">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>124 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-124">return</a>)<br/>
				[ The list includes only those who voted in favour of the proposal of Histiaios (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> Miltiades is not included in it): hence perhaps Stein is right in suggesting some change in the text, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> {oi diapherontes te ten psephon basileos kai eontes logou pleistou}. The absence of the name of Coës is remarked by several commentators, who forget that he had accompanied Darius: see ch. 97.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-125">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>125 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-125">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or, “and even so they found the passage of the river with difficulty.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-126">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>126 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-126">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {en Persesi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-127">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>127 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-127">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> 80,000.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-128">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>128 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-128">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {gar}: some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> read {de}; so Stein and other Editors.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-129">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>129 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-129">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> Castor and Polydeukes the sons of Tyndareus, who were among the Argonauts.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-130">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>130 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-130">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {Phera} (genitive).]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-131">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>131 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-131">return</a>)<br/>
				[ From {ois} “sheep” and {lukos} “wolf” ({oin en lukoisi}).]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-132">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>132 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-132">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {phule}, the word being here apparently used loosely.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-133">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>133 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-133">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {‘Erinuon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-134">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>134 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-134">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {meta touto upemeine touto touto}: some Editors mark a lacuna after {upemeine}, or supply some words like {sunebe de}: “after this the children survived, and the same thing happened also in Thera, <abbr>etc.</abbr>”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-135">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>135 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-135">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or, “Grinos.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-136">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>136 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-136">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {Euphemides}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {Euthumides}: the correction is from Pindar, Pyth. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. 455.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-137">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>137 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-137">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {onax}, the usual form of address to Apollo; so in ch. 155.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-138">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>138 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-138">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or, “Axos.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-139">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>139 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-139">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> Aristoteles, Pind. Pyth. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. 87.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-140">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>140 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-140">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {metaxu apolipon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-141">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>141 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-141">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or, “it happened both to himself and to the other men of Thera according to their former evil fortune”; but this would presuppose the truth of the story told in ch. 151, and {paligkotos} may mean simply “adverse” or “hostile.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-142">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>142 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-142">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {eontes tosoutoi osoi k.t.l.} They could hardly have failed to increase in number, but no new settlers had been added.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-143">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>143 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-143">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {usteron elthe gas anadaiomenes}, “too late for the division of land.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-144">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>144 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-144">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or, “Thestis.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-145">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>145 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-145">return</a>)<br/>
				[ The <abbr>MSS.</abbr> give also “Aliarchos” and “Learchos.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-146">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>146 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-146">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {mathon ekasta}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-147">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>147 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-147">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ton terioikon}: <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> conquered Libyans.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-148">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>148 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-148">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {nesioteon panton}: <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the natives of the Cyclades, cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. 99.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-149">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>149 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-149">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {amphirruton ten Kurenen einai}: some Editors read by conjecture {ten amphirruton Kurenen einai} (or {Kurenen ten amph, einai}), “that Kyrene was the place flowed round by water.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-150">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>150 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-150">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {pselion}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-151">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>151 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-151">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or, “Giligammai.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-152">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>152 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-152">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the plant so called, figured on the coins of Kyrene and Barca.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-153">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>153 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-153">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or, “Asbytai.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-154">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>154 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-154">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> further from the coast, so {katuperthe}, ch. 174 <abbr>etc.</abbr>, cp. ch. 16.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-155">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>155 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-155">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or “Cabales.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-156">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>156 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-156">return</a>)<br/>
				[ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 216.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-157">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>157 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-157">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Distinct from the people of the same name mentioned in ch. 183: those here mentioned are called “Gamphasantes” by Pliny.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-158">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>158 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-158">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {glukuteta}, “sweetness.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-159">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>159 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-159">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {allen te ekatomben kai de kai}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-160">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>160 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-160">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {epithespisanta to tripodi}, which can hardly mean “prophesied sitting upon the tripod.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-161">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>161 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-161">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Lit. “the men come together regularly to one place within three months,” which seems to mean that meetings are held every three months, before one of which the child is brought.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-162">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>162 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-162">return</a>)<br/>
				[ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 42.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-163">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>163 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-163">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> in the middle of the morning.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-164">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>164 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-164">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {tripsin}: the “feel” to the touch: hence it might mean either hardness or softness according to the context.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-165">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>165 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-165">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {troglodutas}: “Troglodytes.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-166">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>166 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-166">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {uperballonti}: “when his heat is greatest.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-167">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>167 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-167">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ede}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-168">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>168 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-168">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or “red.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-169">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>169 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-169">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {domon}: Reiske reads {omon} by conjecture, “over his shoulder.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-170">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>170 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-170">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or (according to some <abbr>MSS.</abbr>), “practise this much and do it well.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-171">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>171 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-171">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {akatapseusta}. Several Editors have adopted the conjecture {katapseusta}, “other fabulous beasts.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-172">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>172 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-172">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {orues}: perhaps for {oruges} from {orux}, a kind of antelope.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-173">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>173 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-173">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {diktues}: the meaning is uncertain.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-174">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>174 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-174">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {ekhinees}, “urchins.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-175">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>175 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-175">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or “Zabykes.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-176">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>176 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-176">return</a>)<br/>
				[ Or “Zygantes.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-177">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>177 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-177">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {eie d’ an pan}: cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. 9. Some translate, “and this might well be so.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-178">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>178 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-178">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {oud’ areten einai ’tis e Libue spoudaie}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-179">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>179 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-179">return</a>)<br/>
				[ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> corn; cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 193.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-180">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>180 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-180">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {bounous}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-181">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>181 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-181">return</a>)<br/>
				[ See ch. 167.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-182">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>182 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-182">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {meden allo neokhmoun kata Barkaious}: cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. 19.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-183">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>183 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-183">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {paralabontes}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link4note-184">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>184 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link4noteref-184">return</a>)<br/>
				[ {epiphthonoi}.]</p>
				<!--Book IV endnotes end-->
				<!--Book V endnotes begin-->
				<p>1 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-1">return</a>) [ {ie paion} (or {paian}), as the burden of a song of triumph.]</p>
				<p>2 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-2">return</a>) [ {eggenetai}: many <abbr>MSS.</abbr> and some Editors read {en genetai}, “and the race can never become united.”]</p>
				<p>3 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-3">return</a>) [ <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. 93.]</p>
				<p>301 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-301">return</a>) [ Or “from the time that he was born.”]</p>
				<p>4 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-4">return</a>) [ {to astikton} is probably for {to me estikhthai}: but possibly the meaning may be, “those who are not so marked are of low birth.”]</p>
				<p>5 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-5">return</a>) [ “the greatest prizes are assigned for single combat in proportion” (as it is more difficult).]</p>
				<p>6 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-6">return</a>) [ Or “Siriopaionians.”]</p>
				<p>7 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-7">return</a>) [ The words “and about the Doberians and Agrianians and Odomantians” are marked by Stein as an interpolation, on the ground that the two tribes first mentioned are themselves Paionian; but Doberians are distinguished from Paionians in <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 113.]</p>
				<p>8 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-8">return</a>) [ {theres katarraktes}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {thures katapaktes} (which can hardly be right, since the Ionic form would be {katapektes}), meaning “fastened down.” Stein suggests {thures katepaktes} (from {katepago}), which might mean “a door closed downwards,” but the word is not found. (The Medicean <abbr>MS.</abbr> has {e} written over the last {a} of {katapaktes}.)]</p>
				<p>9 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-9">return</a>) [ {diapinontes}: or perhaps, “drinking against one another.”]</p>
				<p>10 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-10">return</a>) [ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. 137.]</p>
				<p>11 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-11">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> “he was drawn to run in the first pair.”]</p>
				<p>12 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-12">return</a>) [ The best <abbr>MSS.</abbr> give this form throughout, which is also used by Aeschylus: cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. 70, note 60.]</p>
				<p>13 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-13">return</a>) [ {ekakothesan}.]</p>
				<p>14 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-14">return</a>) [ {toutou}: it is doubtful whether this means his power or his death. Perhaps something has dropped out after {teleuta}.]</p>
				<p>15 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-15">return</a>) [ {anesis}: a conjectural emendation of {aneos}. (Perhaps however, the word was rather {ananeosis}, “after a short time there was a renewal of evils”). Grote wishes to translate this clause, “after a short time there was an abatement of evils,” being of opinion that the {anesis kakon} lasted about eight years. However the expression {ou pollon khronon} is so loose that it might well cover the required period of time.]</p>
				<p>16 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-16">return</a>) [ {praskhema}.]</p>
				<p>17 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-17">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> Miletos and Naxos.]</p>
				<p>18 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-18">return</a>) [ {ton pakheon}.]</p>
				<p>1801 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-1801">return</a>) [ {umin}: omitted in some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> and editions.]</p>
				<p>19 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-19">return</a>) [ Lit. “dividing him in such a manner.”]</p>
				<p>20 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-20">return</a>) [ {kai to teikhos esaxanto}: {esaxanto} from {satto}, which generally means “load.” Various conjectures have been made, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> {kai to teikhos ephraxanto}, or {kata takhos esaxanto}, the comma after {pota} being removed.]</p>
				<p>2001 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-2001">return</a>) [ {me de neoteron ti poieuses tes Miletou}, “if Miletos made no change (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> rebellion).”]</p>
				<p>21 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-21">return</a>) [ {katairetheie}, “taken down” from their place (cp. {anetheke} below).]</p>
				<p>22 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-22">return</a>) [ {en to peoto ton logon}. The reference is to <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 92.]</p>
				<p>23 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-23">return</a>) [ {isonomien}: cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. 80.]</p>
				<p>24 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-24">return</a>) [ {akromantes}: cp. {akrakholos}. It may mean “somewhat mad,” so {akrozumos}, “slightly leavened,” and other words.]</p>
				<p>25 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-25">return</a>) [ {Kinupa}: for this Stein reads by conjecture {Aibuen} and afterwards {para Kinupa potamon} for {para potamon}: but Kinyps was the name of the district about the river (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. 198), and the name of the river is easily supplied from this.]</p>
				<p>26 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-26">return</a>) [ {Makeon te kai Libuon}. The Macai were of course Libyans, therefore perhaps we should read (with Niebuhr) {Makeon te Libuon}: or {Makeon te kai allon Libuon}.]</p>
				<p>27 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-27">return</a>) [ Stein thinks that Heracleia Minoa on the S. coast of Sicily cannot be meant, because too distant to be considered part of the “land of Eryx.” Evidently however this expression is very vague, and there seems no need to correct the text as he proposes.]</p>
				<p>28 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-28">return</a>) [ {para ten Italion}: the name applied anciently only to the Southwest of the peninsula.]</p>
				<p>29 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-29">return</a>) [ {Krathin}, the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> give {krastin} here, and {krastie} below for {Krathie}. Sybaris was situated between the rivers Crathis and Sybaris.]</p>
				<p>30 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-30">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> “of the Marketplace.”]</p>
				<p>31 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-31">return</a>) [ {periodos}.]</p>
				<p>32 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-32">return</a>) [ {kurbasias}: see <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 64.]</p>
				<p>33 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-33">return</a>) [ {poluargurotatoi}: this seems to include gold also, for which Lydia was famous.]</p>
				<p>34 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-34">return</a>) [ {poluprobatotatoi}.]</p>
				<p>35 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-35">return</a>) [ {tende}, pointing to it in the map.]</p>
				<p>36 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-36">return</a>) [ If {anaballesthai} is the true reading here, it cannot mean, “put off to another time,” as Stein translates it; for the form of the sentence proves that it is to be taken as a question, coordinate with that which follows: {peri men khores ara ou polles khreon esti umeas makhas anaballesthai, parekhon de tes Asies arkhein allo ti airesesthe}; the first clause being in sense subordinate to the second.]</p>
				<p>37 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-37">return</a>) [ {es triten emeren}.]</p>
				<p>38 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-38">return</a>) [ {diaphthereei se}. It is impossible to reproduce the double meaning of {diaphtheirein}, “to destroy,” and “to corrupt with bribes.” The child was apparently alarmed by the vehement gestures of Aristagoras and supposed that he was going to kill her father. Cleomenes accepts the omen.]</p>
				<p>39 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-39">return</a>) [ {stathmoi}: “stations,” the distance between them averaging here about 120 stades.]</p>
				<p>40 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-40">return</a>) [ {parasaggai}: the “parasang,” as estimated at 30 stades, would be nearly 3½ English miles.]</p>
				<p>4001 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-4001">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> a narrow pass; so also below in speaking of the passes into Kilikia.]</p>
				<p>41 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-41">return</a>) [ In the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> this clause follows the account of the four rivers, and the distance through Matiene is given as “four stages” with no number of leagues added. By transposing the clause we avoid placing the rivers in Armenia instead of Matiene; and by making the number of stages thirty-four, with a corresponding number of leagues, we make the total right at the end and give the proper extension to Matiene.]</p>
				<p>42 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-42">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> Zabatos: the name has perhaps fallen out of the text.]</p>
				<p>43 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-43">return</a>) [ {o d’ usteron}: “the one mentioned afterwards.” Stein reads {o d’ usteros}.]</p>
				<p>44 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-44">return</a>) [ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 189.]</p>
				<p>45 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-45">return</a>) [ {parasagges}.]</p>
				<p>46 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-46">return</a>) [ {stadia}: the stade being equal to 606¾ English feet.]</p>
				<p>47 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-47">return</a>) [ Reckoned for the march of an army.]</p>
				<p>48 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-48">return</a>) [ Omitting {to eoutou pathei} which stands in the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> before {enargestaten}. If the words are retained, we must translate “which clearly pointed to his fate.”]</p>
				<p>49 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-49">return</a>) [ {apeipamenos ten opsin}, which some translate “he made offerings to avert the dream.”]</p>
				<p>4901 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-4901">return</a>) [ {tisi}: many Editors adopt the conjecture {trisi}, three.]</p>
				<p>50 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-50">return</a>) [ {anetheken eon}: various conjectures have been made here, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> {anetheken elon}, {anetheken ion}, {anetheke theo}, {anetheken eont}, {anetheke neon}: the last, which is Bentley’s, is perhaps the best; but it is doubtful whether the active form of the verb is admissible.]</p>
				<p>51 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-51">return</a>) [ {autos}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {auton}. If {autos} is right, the meaning is “from his own property.”]</p>
				<p>52 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-52">return</a>) [ The expression {Peisistratidai} is used loosely for the family in general.]</p>
				<p>53 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-53">return</a>) [ {porinou lithou}, “tufa.”]</p>
				<p>5301 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-5301">return</a>) [ Or “of God.”]</p>
				<p>54 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-54">return</a>) [ {Koniaion}. There is no such place as Conion known in Thessaly, but we cannot correct the text with any certainty.]</p>
				<p>55 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-55">return</a>) [ There is perhaps a play of words in {basileus} and {leuster}.]</p>
				<p>56 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-56">return</a>) [ {prutaneio}.]</p>
				<p>57 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-57">return</a>) [ “Rulers of the people.”]</p>
				<p>58 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-58">return</a>) [ “Swine-ites.”]</p>
				<p>59 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-59">return</a>) [ “Ass-ites.”]</p>
				<p>60 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-60">return</a>) [ “Pig-ites.”]</p>
				<p>61 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-61">return</a>) [ {proteron aposmenon, tote panta}: most of the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> read {panton} for {panta}. The Editors propose various corrections, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> {proteron apospenon panton, tote k.t.l.}, “which before were excluded from everything,” or {proteron apospenon, tote panton metadidous}, “giving the people, which before he had despised, a share of all rights”: or {panton} is corrected to {epanion}, “on his return from exile,” temporary exile being supposed as the result of the defeat mentioned in ch. 66.]</p>
				<p>62 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-62">return</a>) [ {tous enageas}.]</p>
				<p>63 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-63">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> of Athene Polias in the Erechtheion.]</p>
				<p>64 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-64">return</a>) [ Cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. 145.]</p>
				<p>6401 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-6401">return</a>) [ {tous boethous}: most of the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {tous Boiotous}.]</p>
				<p>65 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-65">return</a>) [ {ippobotai}.]</p>
				<p>66 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-66">return</a>) [ {dimneos apotimesamenoi}.]</p>
				<p>67 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-67">return</a>) [ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. 53.]</p>
				<p>68 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-68">return</a>) [ {isegorin}: probably not “equal freedom of speech,” but practically the same as {isonomie}, ch. 37.]</p>
				<p>69 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-69">return</a>) [ Lit. “penetrated the Athenian greatly”: most <abbr>MSS.</abbr> and Editors read {esineonto} (or {esinonto}) for {esikneonto}, which is given by the first hand in at least two good <abbr>MSS.</abbr>]</p>
				<p>70 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-70">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> “Athene (protectress) of the city,” who shared with Erechtheus the temple on the Acropolis called the “Erechtheion”; see <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. 55.]</p>
				<p>71 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-71">return</a>) [ More lit. “to give and receive from one another satisfaction.”]</p>
				<p>72 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-72">return</a>) [ {eti tode poiesai nomon einai, para sphisi ekateroisi k.t.l.} The Editors punctuate variously, and alterations have been proposed in the text.]</p>
				<p>73 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-73">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> Damia and Auxesia.]</p>
				<p>74 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-74">return</a>) [ {ginoito}: some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> read {an ginoito}, “would become”: so Stein and many other Editors.]</p>
				<p>75 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-75">return</a>) [ Some Editors omit this clause, “whither⁠—refuge.”]</p>
				<p>76 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-76">return</a>) [ “having grown a good opinion of itself.”]</p>
				<p>7601 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-7601">return</a>) [ Or, altering {oste} to {os ge} or {osper}, “as the neighbours of these men first of all, that is the Boeotians and Chalkidians, have already learnt, and perhaps some others will afterwards learn that they have committed an error.” The word {amarton} would thus be added as an afterthought, with reference primarily to the Corinthians, see ch. 75.]</p>
				<p>77 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-77">return</a>) [ {peiresometha spheas ama umin apikomenoi tisasthai}: some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> read {akeomenoi} and omit {tisasthai}. Hence it has been proposed to read {peisesometha sphea ama umin akeomenoi}, “we will endeavour to remedy this with your help,” which may be right.]</p>
				<p>78 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-78">return</a>) [ So the name is given by the better class of <abbr>MSS.</abbr> Others, followed by most Editors, make it “Sosicles.”]</p>
				<p>79 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-79">return</a>) [ {isokratias}.]</p>
				<p>80 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-80">return</a>) [ Lit. “gave and took (in marriage) from one another.”]</p>
				<p>81 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-81">return</a>) [ {Eetion, outis se tiei polutiton eonta}: the play upon {Eetion} and {tio} can hardly be rendered. The “rolling rock” in the next line is an allusion to Petra, the name of the deme.]</p>
				<p>82 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-82">return</a>) [ {aietos en petresi kuei}, with a play upon the names {Eetion} ({Aeton}) and {Petre} again.]</p>
				<p>83 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-83">return</a>) [ {ophruoenta}, “situated on a brow or edge,” the regular descriptive epithet of Corinth.]</p>
				<p>84 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-84">return</a>) [ {kupselen}: cp. Aristoph. Pax, 631.]</p>
				<p>85 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-85">return</a>) [ {amphidection}: commonly translated “ambiguous,” but in fact the oracle is of the clearest, so much so that Abicht cuts the knot by inserting {ouk}. Stein explains it to mean “doubly favourable,” {amphoterothen dection}. I understand it to mean “two-edged” (cp. {amphekes}), in the sense that while promising success to Kypselos and his sons, it prophesies also the deposition of the family in the generation after, and so acts (or cuts) both ways.]</p>
				<p>86 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-86">return</a>) [ {anapodizon}, “calling him back over the same ground again.”]</p>
				<p>87 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-87">return</a>) [ Evidently the war must be dated earlier than the time of Peisistratos.]</p>
				<p>8701 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-8701">return</a>) [ Or (according to some <abbr>MSS.</abbr>), “another of the citizens, named Hermophantos.”]</p>
				<p>88 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-88">return</a>) [ {tes sulloges oste tauta sunuphanthenai}, “the assembling together so that these things were woven.”]</p>
				<p>89 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-89">return</a>) [ {kai allos lematos pleos}.]</p>
				<p>90 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-90">return</a>) [ {plospheresteron}, or perhaps {plopheresteron}, “to be preferred”; so one <abbr>MS.</abbr>: {plospheres} ordinarily means “like.”]</p>
				<p>91 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-91">return</a>) [ {drepano}, cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 93.]</p>
				<p>92 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-92">return</a>) [ {delade}, ironical.]</p>
				<p>93 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-93">return</a>) [ Or, “Labranda.”]</p>
				<p>94 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-94">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> Carians, Persians, and Ionians.]</p>
				<p>95 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-95">return</a>) [ {en Pedaso}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> vary between {en Pidaso, epi daso}, and {epi lasoisi}, and Valla’s translation has “in viam quae in Mylassa fert.” Some Editors read {epi Mulasoisi}, others {epi Pedaso}.]</p>
				<p>96 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-96">return</a>) [ {egkerasamenos pregmata megala}.]</p>
				<p>97 (<a class="pginternal" href="#linknoteref-97">return</a>) [ {andros logopoiou}.]</p>
				<!--Book V endnotes end-->
				<!--Book VI endnotes begin-->
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-1">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>1 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-1">return</a>) [ {proboulous}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-2">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>2 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-2">return</a>) [ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 148.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-3">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>3 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-3">return</a>) [ {epi keras}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-4">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>4 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-4">return</a>) [ {diekploon poieumenos tesi neusi di alleleon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-5">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>5 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-5">return</a>) [ {tou Dareiou}: a conjecture based upon Valla’s translation. The <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {ton Dareion}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-6">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>6 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-6">return</a>) [ {prophasios epilabomenoi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-601">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>601 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-601">return</a>) [ {en stele anagraphenai patrothen}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-7">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>7 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-7">return</a>) [ “were very roughly handled.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-8">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>8 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-8">return</a>) [ {epibateuontas}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-801">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>801 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-801">return</a>) [ {nuktos te gar}: so Stein for {nuktos te}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-9">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>9 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-9">return</a>) [ {kat akres}, lit. “from the top downwards,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> town and citadel both.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-10">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>10 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-10">return</a>) [ See ch. 77.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-11">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>11 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-11">return</a>) [ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 92 and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. 36.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-1101">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>1101 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-1101">return</a>) [ {Kalen akten}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-12">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>12 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-12">return</a>) [ Possibly the reading should be {Inuka}, “Inyx.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-13">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>13 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-13">return</a>) [ {ton en te naumakhie}: perhaps we should read {ten en te naumakhin}, “which took place in the sea-fight.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-14">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>14 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-14">return</a>) [ {en Koiloisi kaleomenoisi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-15">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>15 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-15">return</a>) [ {grammata didaskomenoisi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-16">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>16 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-16">return</a>) [ {limainouses}: a conjectural reading for {deimainouses}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-17">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>17 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-17">return</a>) [ Lit. “and it became in fact the work of the cavalry.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-18">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>18 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-18">return</a>) [ {esagenouon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-19">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>19 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-19">return</a>) [ Or (according to some good <abbr>MSS.</abbr>) “Thelymbri01.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-20">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>20 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-20">return</a>) [ Cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. 120.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-21">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>21 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-21">return</a>) [ {stadioi}: the distances here mentioned are equal to a little more than four and a little less than fifty miles respectively.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-22">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>22 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-22">return</a>) [ {en gnome gegonos}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-23">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>23 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-23">return</a>) [ {pituos tropon}: the old name of the town was Pityuss01.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-24">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>24 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-24">return</a>) [ That is to say, Kimon was his half-brother, and Stesagoras and the younger Miltiades his nephews.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-25">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>25 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-25">return</a>) [ See ch. 103.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-26">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>26 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-26">return</a>) [ {delade}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-27">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>27 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-27">return</a>) [ {eleluthee}, but the meaning must be this, and it is explained by the clause, {trito men gar etei k.t.l.}]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-28">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>28 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-28">return</a>) [ {stadia}: see <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. 52, note 40.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-29">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>29 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-29">return</a>) [ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. 80.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-30">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>30 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-30">return</a>) [ {entos Makedonon}, “on their side of the Macedonians.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-3001">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>3001 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-3001">return</a>) [ Or (according to some <abbr>MSS.</abbr>) “about three hundred.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-31">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>31 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-31">return</a>) [ Or “Scaptesyle.” (The Medicean <abbr>MS.</abbr> however has {skaptes ules}, not {skaptesules}, as reported by Stein.)]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-32">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>32 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-32">return</a>) [ {ta proiskheto aiteon}, “that which he put forward demanding it.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-33">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>33 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-33">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> “ram.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-34">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>34 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-34">return</a>) [ {ton geraiteron}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-35">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>35 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-35">return</a>) [ {en to demosio}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-36">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>36 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-36">return</a>) [ This is commonly understood to mean, leaving out of account the god who was father of Perseus; but the reason for stopping short at Perseus is given afterwards, and the expression {tou theou apeontos} refers perhaps rather to the case of Heracles, the legend of whose birth is rejected by Herodotus (see <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 43), and rejected also by this genealogy, which passes through Amphitryon up to Perseus. I take it that {tou theou apeontos} means “reckoning Heracles” (who is mentioned by name just below in this connection) “as the son of Amphitryon and not of Zeus.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-37">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>37 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-37">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> “of heaven.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-38">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>38 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-38">return</a>) [ {medimnon}, the Lacedemonian {medimnos} being equal to rather more than two bushels.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-39">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>39 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-39">return</a>) [ {tetarten Lakomiken}, quantity uncertain.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-40">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>40 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-40">return</a>) [ {proxeinous}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-41">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>41 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-41">return</a>) [ {khoinikas}. There were 48 {khoinikes} in the {medimnos}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-42">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>42 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-42">return</a>) [ {kotulen}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-4201">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>4201 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-4201">return</a>) [ The loose manner in which this is expressed, leaving it uncertain whether each king was supposed by the writer to have two votes given for him (cp. Thuc. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 20), or whether the double vote was one for each king, must of course be reproduced in the translation.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-43">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>43 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-43">return</a>) [ {perioikon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-44">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>44 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-44">return</a>) [ See ch. 51.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-45">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>45 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-45">return</a>) [ {proergazomenon}: a conjectural emendation of {prosergazomenon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-46">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>46 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-46">return</a>) [ {tes apates te paragoge}, “by the misleading of the deception.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-47">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>47 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-47">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> lunar months.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-48">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>48 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-48">return</a>) [ {en thoko katemeno}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-49">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>49 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-49">return</a>) [ {pandemei}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-50">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>50 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-50">return</a>) [ {aren}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-51">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>51 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-51">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> “prayed for by the people.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-52">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>52 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-52">return</a>) [ {di a}: a conjectural emendation of {dia ta}. Some Editors suppose that other words have dropped out.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-53">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>53 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-53">return</a>) [ {promantin}: cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-54">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>54 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-54">return</a>) [ {ton splagkhnon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-55">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>55 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-55">return</a>) [ {tou erkeiou}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-56">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>56 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-56">return</a>) [ {ton mataioteron logon legontes}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-57">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>57 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-57">return</a>) [ Lit. “on the third night after the first,” but the meaning is as given.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-58">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>58 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-58">return</a>) [ Most of the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have “Astrobacos,” which may be right.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-59">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>59 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-59">return</a>) [ Or “to the honour of the Lacedemonians.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-60">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>60 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-60">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> any more than his predecessor.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-61">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>61 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-61">return</a>) [ See ch. 50.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-62">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>62 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-62">return</a>) [ {neotera epresse pregmata}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-63">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>63 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-63">return</a>) [ {up Arkadon}: several good <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {ton Arkadon}, which is adopted by some Editors. The meaning would be “near this city it is said that there is the Styx water of the Arcadians.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-64">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>64 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-64">return</a>) [ {upomargoteron}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-65">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>65 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-65">return</a>) [ Demeter and Core.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-66">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>66 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-66">return</a>) [ The <abbr>MSS.</abbr> give also “Sepeia” and “Sipei01.” The place is not elsewhere mentioned.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-67">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>67 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-67">return</a>) [ See ch. 19.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-68">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>68 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-68">return</a>) [ {duo mneai}: cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. 77.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-69">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>69 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-69">return</a>) [ {o theos}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> Hera: cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 105.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-70">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>70 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-70">return</a>) [ {kalliereumeno}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-71">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>71 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-71">return</a>) [ {kat akres}: cp. ch. 18.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-72">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>72 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-72">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> was acquitted of the charge brought against him.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-73">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>73 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-73">return</a>) [ {episkuthison}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-74">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>74 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-74">return</a>) [ {bouleuesthe}: some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> and editions have {boulesthe}, “desiring.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-75">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>75 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-75">return</a>) [ {en khrono ikneumeno}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-76">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>76 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-76">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> take an oath to that effect.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-77">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>77 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-77">return</a>) [ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. 80.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-78">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>78 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-78">return</a>) [ {penteteris}. The reading {penteres}, which is given by most of the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> and by several Editors, can hardly be defended.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-79">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>79 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-79">return</a>) [ {kai en gar}, “and since there was.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-80">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>80 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-80">return</a>) [ {Knoithou kaleomenos}: cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 143.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-81">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>81 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-81">return</a>) [ {thesmophorou}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-82">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>82 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-82">return</a>) [ {pentaethlon epaskesas}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-83">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>83 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-83">return</a>) [ {mounomakhien epaskeon}, “practising single combat,” as if training for the games.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-84">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>84 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-84">return</a>) [ {para te Ikarion}: the use of {para} and the absence of the article may justify the conjecture {para te Ikarion} (or {Ikaron}) “by Icaria” (or “Icaros”), the island from which the Icarian Sea had its name.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-85">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>85 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-85">return</a>) [ This perhaps should be emended, for the event referred to occurred two years before, cp. ch. 46 and 48: The reading {trito proteron etei} has been proposed.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-86">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>86 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-86">return</a>) [ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. 33 <abbr>ff.</abbr>]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-8601">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>8601 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-8601">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> Apollo: or perhaps more generally, “God,” as in ch. 27.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-87">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>87 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-87">return</a>) [ This in brackets is probably an interpolation. It is omitted by some of the best <abbr>MSS.</abbr> Some Editors suspect the genuineness of the next four lines also, on internal grounds.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-88">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>88 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-88">return</a>) [ {erxies}, perhaps meaning “worker.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-89">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>89 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-89">return</a>) [ {areios}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-90">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>90 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-90">return</a>) [ {megas areios}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-91">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>91 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-91">return</a>) [ {ippoboteon}, lit. “horse-breeding”: see <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. 77.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-9101">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>9101 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-9101">return</a>) [ Or (according to some <abbr>MSS.</abbr>), “having come to shore at these places.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-92">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>92 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-92">return</a>) [ {katergontes}: the word is not elsewhere found intransitive, yet it is rather difficult to supply {tous Athenaious}. Some alterations have been proposed, but none probable.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-93">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>93 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-93">return</a>) [ Lit. “and it happened that in winning this victory he won the same victory as his half-brother Miltiades.” See ch. 36.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-94">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>94 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-94">return</a>) [ Or, according to some authorities, “Philippides.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-95">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>95 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-95">return</a>) [ Lit. “except the circle were full.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-96">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>96 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-96">return</a>) [ Or “Aigilei01.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-97">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>97 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-97">return</a>) [ Lit. “by violence, having coughed.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-98">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>98 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-98">return</a>) [ “by the bean.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-99">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>99 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-99">return</a>) [ {es se toi}, a conjectural emendation of {es se ti}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-100">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>100 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-100">return</a>) [ {prutaneie tes emeres}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-101">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>101 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-101">return</a>) [ Some Editors propose to omit {gar} or alter it. If it be allowed to stand, the meaning must be that the importance of the place is testified by the commemoration mentioned.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-102">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>102 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-102">return</a>) [ {es tas panegurias}, some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {kai panegurias}, “hold sacrifices and solemn assemblies.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-103">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>103 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-103">return</a>) [ {penteterisi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-104">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>104 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-104">return</a>) [ Lit. “the good things.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-105">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>105 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-105">return</a>) [ {stadioi}: the distance would be rather over 1600 yards.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-106">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>106 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-106">return</a>) [ Whether this is thrown in here by the historian as an explanation of the rapid advance, or as an additional source of wonder on the part of the Persians at the boldness of the Athenians, is not clear.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-107">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>107 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-107">return</a>) [ Or (according to some <abbr>MSS.</abbr>) “having taken hold.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-108">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>108 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-108">return</a>) [ The account of how the oil was dealt with has perhaps dropt out: one <abbr>MS.</abbr> and the Aldine edition have “the oil they collect in vessels, and this,” <abbr>etc.</abbr>]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-109">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>109 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-109">return</a>) [ This chapter is omitted by several of the best <abbr>MSS.</abbr>, and is almost certainly an interpolation. (In the Medicean <abbr>MS.</abbr> it has been added in the margin by a later hand.)]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-110">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>110 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-110">return</a>) [ Answering to “Callias for his part” at the end of ch. 121, the connection being broken by the interpolated passage.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-111">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>111 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-111">return</a>) [ {ouden esson}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-112">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>112 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-112">return</a>) [ {patre}, “family,” or possibly “country,” as in ch. 128.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-113">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>113 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-113">return</a>) [ {to legomeno es to meson}: perhaps only “general conversation.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-114">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>114 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-114">return</a>) [ {katekhon pollon tous allous}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-115">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>115 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-115">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> “though the dancing may be good.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-116">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>116 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-116">return</a>) [ {aponostesein}: some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {apanastesein}, “he would not take away his army thence.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-117">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>117 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-117">return</a>) [ {upozakoron}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-118">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>118 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-118">return</a>) [ {ton khthonion theon}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> Demeter and Persephone: cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 153.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-119">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>119 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-119">return</a>) [ {thesmophorou}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-120">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>120 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-120">return</a>) [ {to megaron}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-121">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>121 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-121">return</a>) [ {sphi autoi}: a conjectural rendering of {sphisi autoisi}, which can only be taken with {eousan}, meaning “belonging to them” <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the Athenians, and involves the insertion of {Pelasgoisi} or something equivalent with {edosan}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link6note-122">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>122 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link6noteref-122">return</a>) [ {ktesamenoi}: some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> and editions have {stesamenoi}, “set fifty-oared galleys in place.”]</p>
				<!--Book VI endnotes end-->
				<!--Book VII endnotes begin-->
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-1">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>1 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-1">return</a>) [ {kai ploia}, for transport of horses and also of provisions: however these words are omitted in some of the best <abbr>MSS.</abbr>]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-2">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>2 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-2">return</a>) [ {all ei}: this is the reading of the better class of <abbr>MSS.</abbr> The rest have {alla}, which with {pressois} could only express a wish for success, and not an exhortation to action.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-3">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>3 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-3">return</a>) [ {outos men oi o logos en timoros}: the words may mean “this manner of discourse was helpful for his purpose.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-4">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>4 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-4">return</a>) [ {khresmologon e kai diatheten khresmon ton Mousaiou}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-5">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>5 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-5">return</a>) [ {aphanizoiato}, representing the present tense {aphanizontai} in the oracle.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-6">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>6 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-6">return</a>) [ {ton thronon touton}: most <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {ton thronon, touto}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-7">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>7 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-7">return</a>) [ {epistasthe kou pantes}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {ta epistasthe kou pantes}, which is given by most Editors. In that case {oia erxan} would be an exclamation, “What evils they did to us,⁠ ⁠… things which ye all know well, I think.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-8">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>8 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-8">return</a>) [ {touton mentoi eineka}: it is hardly possible here to give {mentoi} its usual meaning: Stein in his latest edition reads {touton men toinun}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-9">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>9 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-9">return</a>) [ {suneneike}: Stein reads {suneneike se}, “supposing that thou art worsted.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-10">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>10 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-10">return</a>) [ {ep andri ge eni}, as opposed to a god.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-11">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>11 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-11">return</a>) [ {akousesthai tina psemi ton k.t.l.}, “each one of those who are left behind.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-12">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>12 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-12">return</a>) [ {kai Kurou}, a conjectural emendation of {tou Kurou}. The text of the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> enumerates all these as one continuous line of ascent. It is clear however that the enumeration is in fact of two separate lines, which combine in Teïspes, the line of ascent through the father Darius being, Darius, Hystaspes, Arsames, Ariamnes, Teïspes, and through the mother, Atossa, Cyrus, Cambyses, Teïspes.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-13">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>13 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-13">return</a>) [ {kai mala}: perhaps, “even.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-1301">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>1301 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-1301">return</a>) [ Lit. “nor is he present who will excuse thee.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-14">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>14 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-14">return</a>) [ Lit. “my youth boiled over.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-15">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>15 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-15">return</a>) [ Lit. “words more unseemly than was right.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-16">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>16 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-16">return</a>) [ {all oude tauta esti o pai theia}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-17">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>17 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-17">return</a>) [ {peplanesthai}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-18">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>18 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-18">return</a>) [ {autai}: a correction of {autai}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-19">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>19 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-19">return</a>) [ {se de epiphoitesei}: the better <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {oude epiphoitesei}, which is adopted by Stein.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-20">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>20 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-20">return</a>) [ {pempto de etei anomeno}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-21">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>21 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-21">return</a>) [ {ton Ionion}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-22">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>22 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-22">return</a>) [ {kai oud ei eperai pros tautesi prosgenomenai}: some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> read {oud eterai pros tautesi genomenai}, which is adopted (with variations) by some Editors. The meaning would be “not all these, nor others which happened in addition to these, were equal to this one.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-23">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>23 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-23">return</a>) [ {ama strateuomenoisi}: {ama} is omitted in some <abbr>MSS.</abbr>]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-24">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>24 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-24">return</a>) [ {stadion}, and so throughout.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-25">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>25 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-25">return</a>) [ {entos Sanes}: some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> read {ektos Sanes}, which is adopted by Stein, who translates “beyond Sane, but on this side of Mount Athos”: this however will not suit the case of all the towns mentioned, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> Acrothoon, and {ton Athen} just below clearly means the whole peninsula.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-26">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>26 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-26">return</a>) [ {leukolinou}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-27">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>27 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-27">return</a>) [ {ton de on pleiston}: if this reading is right, {siton} must be understood, and some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> read {allon} for {alla} in the sentence above. Stein in his latest edition reads {siton} instead of {pleiston}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-28">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>28 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-28">return</a>) [ Lit. “the name of which happens to be Catarractes.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-29">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>29 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-29">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> 4,000,000.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-30">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>30 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-30">return</a>) [ The {stater dareikos} was of nearly pure gold (cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. 166), weighing about 124 grains.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-3001">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>3001 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-3001">return</a>) [ {stele}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> a square block of stone.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-31">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>31 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-31">return</a>) [ {athanato andri}, taken by some to mean one of the body of “Immortals.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-32">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>32 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-32">return</a>) [ {akte pakhea}: some inferior <abbr>MSS.</abbr> read {akte trakhea}, and hence some Editors have {akte trekhea}, “a rugged foreland.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-33">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>33 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-33">return</a>) [ {dolero}: some Editors read {tholero}, “turbid,” by conjecture.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-34">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>34 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-34">return</a>) [ The meaning is much disputed. I understand Herodotus to state that though the vessels lay of course in the direction of the stream from the Hellespont, that is presenting their prows (or sterns) to the stream, yet this did not mean that they pointed straight towards the Propontis and Euxine; for the stream after passing Sestos runs almost from North to South with even a slight tendency to the East (hence {eurou} a few lines further on), so that ships lying in the stream would point in a line cutting at right angles that of the longer axis (from East to West) of the Pontus and Propontis. This is the meaning of {epikarsios} elsewhere in Herodotus (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 180 and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. 101), and it would be rash to assign to it any other meaning here. It is true however that the expression {pros esperes} is used loosely below for the side toward the Egean. For {anakokheue} a subject must probably be supplied from the clause {pentekonterous⁠—sunthentes}, “that it (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the combination of ships) might support <abbr>etc.</abbr>,” and {ton tonon ton oplon} may either mean as below “the stretched ropes,” or “the tension of the ropes,” which would be relieved by the support: the latter meaning seems to me preferable.]</p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Whitelaw suggests to me that {epikarsios} ({epi kar}) may mean rather “head-foremost,” which seems to be its meaning in Homer (Odyss. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. 70), and from which might be obtained the idea of intersection, one line running straight up against another, which it has in other passages. In that case it would here mean “heading towards the Pontus.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-35">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>35 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-35">return</a>) [ {tas men pros tou Pontou tes eteres}. Most commentators would supply {gephures} with {tes eteres}, but evidently both bridges must have been anchored on both sides.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-36">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>36 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-36">return</a>) [ {eurou}: Stein adopts the conjecture {zephurou}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-37">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>37 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-37">return</a>) [ {ton pentekonteron kai triereon trikhou}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> give {ton pentekonteron kai trikhou}, “between the fifty-oared galleys in as many as three places,” but it is strange that the fifty-oared galleys should be mentioned alone, and there seems no need of {kai} with {trikhou}. Stein reads {ton pentekonteron kai triereon} (omitting {trikhou} altogether), and this may be right.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-38">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>38 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-38">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> in proportion to the quantity: there was of course a greater weight altogether of the papyrus rope.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-39">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>39 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-39">return</a>) [ {autis epezeugnuon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-40">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>40 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-40">return</a>) [ {ekleipsin}: cp. {eklipon} above.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-41">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>41 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-41">return</a>) [ Or, according to some <abbr>MSS.</abbr>, “Nisaian.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-42">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>42 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-42">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> not downwards.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-43">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>43 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-43">return</a>) [ {tina autou sukhnon omilon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-44">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>44 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-44">return</a>) [ {to Priamou Pergamon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-45">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>45 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-45">return</a>) [ {en Abudo mese}: some inferior authorities (followed by most Editors) omit {mese}: but the district seems to be spoken of, as just above.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-46">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>46 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-46">return</a>) [ {proexedre lothou leukou}: some kind of portico or <i>loggia</i> seems to be meant.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-47">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>47 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-47">return</a>) [ {daimonie andoon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-48">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>48 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-48">return</a>) [ {ena auton}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-49">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>49 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-49">return</a>) [ {to proso aiei kleptomenos}: “stealing thy advance continually,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> “advancing insensibly further.” Some take {kleptomenos} as passive, “insensibly lured on further.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-50">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>50 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-50">return</a>) [ {neoteron ti poiesein}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-51">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>51 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-51">return</a>) [ Or, according to some <abbr>MSS.</abbr>, “the Persian land.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-52">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>52 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-52">return</a>) [ Lit. “the name of which happens to be Agora.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-53">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>53 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-53">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> 1,700,000.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-54">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>54 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-54">return</a>) [ {sunnaxantes}: a conjectural emendation very generally adopted of {sunaxantes} or {sunapsantes}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-55">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>55 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-55">return</a>) [ {apageas}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> not stiffly standing up; the opposite to {pepeguias} (ch. 64).]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-56">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>56 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-56">return</a>) [ {lepidos siderees opsin ikhthueideos}: many Editors suppose that some words have dropped out. The {kithon} spoken of may have been a coat of armour, but elsewhere the body armour {thorex} is clearly distinguished from the {kithon}, see <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. 22.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-57">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>57 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-57">return</a>) [ {gerra}: cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. 61 and 102.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-58">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>58 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-58">return</a>) [ Cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 7.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-59">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>59 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-59">return</a>) [ {mitrephoroi esan}: the {mitre} was perhaps a kind of turban.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-60">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>60 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-60">return</a>) [ {tesi Aiguptiesi}, apparently {makhairesi} is meant to be supplied: cp. ch. 91.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-61">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>61 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-61">return</a>) [ {eklethesan}, “were called” from the first.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-62">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>62 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-62">return</a>) [ These words are by some Editors thought to be an interpolation. The Chaldeans in fact had become a caste of priests, cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 181.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-63">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>63 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-63">return</a>) [ {kurbasias}: supposed to be the same as the <i>tiara</i> (cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. 49), but in this case stiff and upright.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-64">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>64 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-64">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> Areians, cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. 93.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-65">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>65 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-65">return</a>) [ {sisurnas}: cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. 109.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-66">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>66 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-66">return</a>) [ {akinakas}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-67">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>67 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-67">return</a>) [ {sisurnophoroi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-68">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>68 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-68">return</a>) [ {zeiras}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-69">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>69 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-69">return</a>) [ {toxa palintona}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-70">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>70 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-70">return</a>) [ {spathes}, which perhaps means the stem of the leaf.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-71">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>71 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-71">return</a>) [ {gupso}, “white chalk.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-72">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>72 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-72">return</a>) [ {milto}, “red ochre.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-73">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>73 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-73">return</a>) [ Some words have apparently been lost containing the name of the nation to which the following description applies. It is suggested that this might be either the Chalybians or the Pisidians.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-74">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>74 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-74">return</a>) [ {lukioergeas}, an emendation from Athenæus of {lukoergeas} (or {lukergeas}), which might perhaps mean “for wolf-hunting.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-75">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>75 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-75">return</a>) [ {anastpastous}: cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. 93.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-76">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>76 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-76">return</a>) [ Some Editors place this clause before the words: “and Smerdomenes the son of Otanes,” for we do not hear of Otanes or Smerdomenes elsewhere as brother and nephew of Darius. On the other hand Mardonios was son of the <i>sister</i> of Darius.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-77">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>77 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-77">return</a>) [ {tukhe}, “hits.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-78">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>78 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-78">return</a>) [ {keletas}, “single horses.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-79">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>79 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-79">return</a>) [ This name is apparently placed here wrongly. It has been proposed to read {Kaspeiroi} or {Paktues}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-80">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>80 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-80">return</a>) [ {ippeue}: the greater number of <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {ippeuei} here as at the beginning of ch. 84, to which this is a reference back, but with a difference of meaning. There the author seemed to begin with the intention of giving a full list of the cavalry force of the Persian Empire, and then confined his account to those actually present on this occasion, whereas here the word in combination with {mouna} refers only to those just enumerated.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-81">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>81 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-81">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> 80,000.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-82">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>82 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-82">return</a>) [ {Suroisi}, see note on <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 104.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-83">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>83 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-83">return</a>) [ {tukous}, which appears to mean ordinarily a tool for stone-cutting.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-84">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>84 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-84">return</a>) [ {mitresi}, perhaps “turbans.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-85">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>85 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-85">return</a>) [ {kithonas}: there is some probability in the suggestion of {kitarias} here, for we should expect mention of a head-covering, and the word {kitaris} (which is explained to mean the same as {tiara}), is quoted by Pollux as occurring in Herodotus.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-86">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>86 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-86">return</a>) [ {kithonas}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-87">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>87 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-87">return</a>) [ {drepana}, “reaping-hooks,” cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. 112.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-88">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>88 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-88">return</a>) [ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 171.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-89">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>89 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-89">return</a>) [ {Pelasgoi Aigialees}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-90">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>90 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-90">return</a>) [ {kerkouroi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-91">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>91 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-91">return</a>) [ {makra}: some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> and editions have {smikra}, “small.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-92">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>92 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-92">return</a>) [ Or “Mapen.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-93">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>93 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-93">return</a>) [ Or “Seldomos.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-94">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>94 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-94">return</a>) [ {metopedon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-95">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>95 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-95">return</a>) [ {me oentes arthmioi}. This is generally taken to mean, “unless they were of one mind together”; but that would very much weaken the force of the remark, and {arthmios} elsewhere is the opposite of {polemios}, cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. 83 and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. 9, 37: Xerxes professes enmity only against those who had refused to give the tokens of submission.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-96">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>96 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-96">return</a>) [ {men mounoisi}: these words are omitted in some good <abbr>MSS.</abbr>, and {mounoisi} has perhaps been introduced from the preceding sentence. The thing referred to in {touto} is the power of fighting in single combat with many at once, which Demaratos is supposed to have claimed for the whole community of the Spartans.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-97">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>97 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-97">return</a>) [ {stergein malista}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-98">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>98 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-98">return</a>) [ {oudamoi ko}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-99">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>99 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-99">return</a>) [ Or, “Strauos.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-100">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>100 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-100">return</a>) [ Or, “Compsatos.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-101">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>101 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-101">return</a>) [ {tas epeirotidas polis}: it is not clear why these are thus distinguished. Stein suggests {Thasion tas epeirotidas polis}, cp. ch. [Footnote 118; and if that be the true reading {ion} is probably a remnant of {Thasion} after {khoras}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-102">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>102 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-102">return</a>) [ Or, “Pistiros.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-103">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>103 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-103">return</a>) [ {oi propheteountes}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> those who interpret the utterances of the Oracle, cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. 36.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-104">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>104 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-104">return</a>) [ {promantis}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-105">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>105 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-105">return</a>) [ {kai ouden poikiloteron}, an expression of which the meaning is not quite clear; perhaps “and the oracles are not at all more obscure,” cp. Eur. Phoen. 470 and Hel. 711 (quoted by Bähr).]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-106">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>106 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-106">return</a>) [ “Ennea Hodoi.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-107">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>107 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-107">return</a>) [ Cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. 84.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-108">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>108 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-108">return</a>) [ The “royal cubit” is about 20 inches; the {daktulos}, “finger’s breadth,” is rather less than ¾ inch.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-109">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>109 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-109">return</a>) [ Or, “Cape Canastraion.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-110">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>110 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-110">return</a>) [ Or “Echeidoros”: so it is usually called, but not by any <abbr>MS.</abbr> here, and by a few only in ch. 127.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-111">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>111 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-111">return</a>) [ {pro mesogaian tamnon tes odou}: cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. 12 and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. 89.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-112">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>112 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-112">return</a>) [ Cp. ch. 6 and 174: but it does not appear that the Aleuadai, of whom Xerxes is here speaking, ever thought of resistance, and perhaps {gnosimakheontes} means, “when they submitted without resistance.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-113">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>113 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-113">return</a>) [ Some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {Ainienes} for {Enienes}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-114">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>114 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-114">return</a>) [ {dekateusai}: there is sufficient authority for this rendering of {dekateuein}, and it seems better here than to understand the word to refer only to a “tithing” of goods.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-115">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>115 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-115">return</a>) [ {es to barathron}, the place of execution at Athens.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-116">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>116 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-116">return</a>) [ “undesirable thing.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-117">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>117 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-117">return</a>) [ {ouk ex isou}: <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> it is one-sided, because the speaker has had experience of only one of the alternatives.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-118">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>118 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-118">return</a>) [ Cp. ch. 143 (end), and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. 62.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-119">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>119 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-119">return</a>) [ {teikheon kithones}, a poetical expression, quoted perhaps from some oracle; and if so, {kithon} may here have the Epic sense of a “coat of mail,” equivalent to {thorex} in <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 181: see ch. 61, note 56.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-120">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>120 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-120">return</a>) [ {to megaron}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-121">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>121 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-121">return</a>) [ The form of address changes abruptly to the singular number, referring to the Athenian people.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-122">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>122 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-122">return</a>) [ {azela}, probably for {aionla}, which has been proposed as a correction: or possibly “wretched.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-123">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>123 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-123">return</a>) [ {oxus Ares}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-124">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>124 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-124">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> Assyrian, cp. ch. 63.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-125">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>125 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-125">return</a>) [ {min}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the city, to which belong the head, feet, and body which have been mentioned.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-126">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>126 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-126">return</a>) [ {kakois d’ epikidnate thumon}: this might perhaps mean (as it is taken by several Editors), “show a courageous soul in your troubles,” but that would hardly suit with the discouraging tone of the context.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-127">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>127 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-127">return</a>) [ {onax}, cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. 15.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-128">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>128 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-128">return</a>) [ {ouros}: the word might of course be for {oros}, “mountain,” and {Kekropos ouros} would then mean the Acropolis (so it is understood by Stein and others), but the combination with Kithairon makes it probable that the reference is to the boundaries of Attica, and this seems more in accordance with the reference to it in <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. 53.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-129">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>129 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-129">return</a>) [ {Demeteros}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-130">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>130 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-130">return</a>) [ {sustas}, “having been joined” cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. 142.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-131">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>131 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-131">return</a>) [ {ton peri ten Ellada Ellenon ta ameino phroneonton}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {ton} also after {Ellenon}, which would mean “those of the Hellenes in Hellas itself, who were of the better mind;” but the expression {ton ta ameino phroneouseon peri ten Ellada} occurs in ch. 172: Some Editors omit {Ellenon} as well as {ton}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-132">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>132 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-132">return</a>) [ {egkekremenoi} (from {egkerannumi}, cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. 124), a conjectural emendation (by Reiske) of {egkekhremenoi}. Others have conjectured {egkekheiremenoi} or {egegermenoi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-133">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>133 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-133">return</a>) [ {te ge alle}: many Editors adopt the conjecture {tede alle} “is like the following, which he expressed on another occasion.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-134">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>134 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-134">return</a>) [ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. 77: This calamity had occurred about fourteen years before, and it was not in order to recover from this that the Argives wished now for a thirty years’ truce; but warned by this they desired (they said) to guard against the consequence of a similar disaster in fighting with the Persians, against whom, according to their own account, they were going to defend themselves independently. So great was their fear of this that, “though fearing the oracle,” they were willing to disobey it on certain conditions.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-135">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>135 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-135">return</a>) [ {probalaion}, cp. {probolous}, ch. 76.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-136">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>136 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-136">return</a>) [ {es tous pleunas}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-137">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>137 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-137">return</a>) [ Cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. 53.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-138">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>138 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-138">return</a>) [ {ethelousi}: this is omitted in most of the <abbr>MSS.</abbr>, but contained in several of the best. Many Editors have omitted it.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-139">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>139 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-139">return</a>) [ {ta oikeia kaka} seems to mean the grievances which each has against his neighbours, “if all the nations of men should bring together into one place their own grievances against their neighbours, desiring to make a settlement with them, each people, when they had examined closely the grievances of others against themselves, would gladly carry away back with them those which they had brought,” judging that they had offended others more than they had suffered themselves.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-140">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>140 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-140">return</a>) [ {oiketor o en Gele}: some Editors read by conjecture {oiketor eon Geles}, others {oiketor en Gele}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-141">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>141 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-141">return</a>) [ {iropsantai ton khthonion theon}: cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. 134.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-142">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>142 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-142">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> by direct inspiration.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-143">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>143 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-143">return</a>) [ {en dorupsoros}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {os en dorupsoros}. Some Editors mark a lacuna.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-144">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>144 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-144">return</a>) [ {gamorous}, the name given to the highest class of citizens.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-145">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>145 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-145">return</a>) [ Or, “Killyrians.” They were conquered Sicanians, in the position of the Spartan Helots.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-146">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>146 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-146">return</a>) [ {pakheas}: cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. 30.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-147">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>147 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-147">return</a>) [ {gar}: inserted conjecturally by many Editors.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-148">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>148 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-148">return</a>) [ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. 46.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-149">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>149 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-149">return</a>) [ {e ke meg oimexeie}, the beginning of a Homeric hexameter, cp. Il. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 125.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-150">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>150 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-150">return</a>) [ Or, “since your speech is so adverse.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-151">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>151 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-151">return</a>) [ See Il. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 552.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-152">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>152 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-152">return</a>) [ Some Editors mark this explanation “Now this is the meaning⁠—year,” as interpolated.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-153">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>153 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-153">return</a>) [ {purannida}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-154">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>154 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-154">return</a>) [ {es meson Kooisi katatheis ten arkhen}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-155">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>155 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-155">return</a>) [ {para Samion}: this is the reading of the best <abbr>MSS.</abbr>: others have {meta Samion}, “together with the Samians,” which is adopted by many Editors. There can be little doubt however that the Skythes mentioned in <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. 23 was the father of this Cadmos, and we know from Thuc. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. 4 that the Samians were deprived of the town soon after they had taken it, by Anaxilaos, who gave it the name of Messene, and no doubt put Cadmos in possession of it, as the son of the former king.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-156">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>156 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-156">return</a>) [ Cp. ch. 154.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-157">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>157 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-157">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> 300,000.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-159">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>159 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-159">return</a>) [ The <abbr>MSS.</abbr> add either {os Karkhedonioi}, or {os Karkhedonioi kai Surekosioi}, but the testimony of the Carthaginians has just been given, {os Phoinikes legousi}, and the Syracusans professed to be unable to discover anything of him at all. Most of the Editors omit or alter the words.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-160">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>160 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-160">return</a>) [ {epimemphesthe}: some Editors have tried corrections, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> {ou ti memnesthe}, “do ye not remember,” or {epimemnesthe}, “remember”; but cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. 106, {oste se me mempsasthai ten⁠ ⁠… diken}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-161">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>161 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-161">return</a>) [ {osa umin⁠ ⁠… Minos epempse menion dakrumata}. The oracle would seem to have been in iambic verse.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-162">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>162 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-162">return</a>) [ {parentheke}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-163">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>163 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-163">return</a>) [ {ou boulomenoi}, apparently equivalent to {me boulemenoi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-164">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>164 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-164">return</a>) [ Cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. 111.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-165">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>165 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-165">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the six commanders of divisions {morai} in the Spartan army.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-166">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>166 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-166">return</a>) [ {mia}: for this most <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {ama}. Perhaps the true reading is {ama mia}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-167">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>167 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-167">return</a>) [ {amaxitos moune}, cp. ch. 200.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-168">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>168 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-168">return</a>) [ {Khutrous}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-169">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>169 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-169">return</a>) [ {ton epibateon autes}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-170">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>170 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-170">return</a>) [ {emeroskopous}: perhaps simply “scouts,” cp. ch. 219, by which it would seem that they were at their posts by night also, though naturally they would not see much except by day.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-171">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>171 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-171">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> “Ant.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-172">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>172 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-172">return</a>) [ {autoi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-173">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>173 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-173">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> 241,400.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-174">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>174 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-174">return</a>) [ {epebateuon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-175">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>175 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-175">return</a>) [ 36,210.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-176">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>176 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-176">return</a>) [ {o ti pleon en auton e elasson}. In ch. 97, which is referred to just above, these ships are stated to have been of many different kinds, and not only fifty-oared galleys.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-177">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>177 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-177">return</a>) [ 240,000.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-178">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>178 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-178">return</a>) [ 517,610.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-179">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>179 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-179">return</a>) [ 1,700,000: see ch. 60.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-180">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>180 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-180">return</a>) [ 80,000.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-181">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>181 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-181">return</a>) [ 2,317,610.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-182">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>182 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-182">return</a>) [ {dokesin de dei legein}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-183">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>183 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-183">return</a>) [ Some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {Ainienes} for {Enienes}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-184">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>184 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-184">return</a>) [ 300,000.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-185">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>185 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-185">return</a>) [ 2,641,610.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-186">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>186 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-186">return</a>) [ {tou makhimou toutou}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-187">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>187 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-187">return</a>) [ {akatoisi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-188">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>188 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-188">return</a>) [ 5,283,220.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-189">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>189 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-189">return</a>) [ {khoinika}, the usual daily allowance.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-190">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>190 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-190">return</a>) [ The {medimnos} is about a bushel and a half, and is equal to 48 {khoinikes}. The reckoning here of 110,340 {medimnoi} is wrong, owing apparently to the setting down of some numbers in the quotient which were in fact part of the dividend.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-191">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>191 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-191">return</a>) [ {prokrossai ormeonto es ponton}: the meaning of {prokrossai} is doubtful, but the introduction of the word is probably due to a reminiscence of Homer, Il. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. 35, where the ships are described as drawn up in rows one behind the other on shore, and where {prokrossas} is often explained to mean {klimakedon}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> either in steps one behind the other owing to the rise of the beach, or in the arrangement of the <i>quincunx</i>. Probably in this passage the idea is rather of the prows projecting in rows like battlements {krossai}, and this is the sense in which the word is used by Herodotus elsewhere (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. 152). The word {krossai} however is used for the successively rising stages of the pyramids (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 125), and {prokrossos} may mean simply “in a row,” or “one behind the other,” which would suit all passages in which it occurs, and would explain the expression {prokrossoi pheromenoi epi ton kindunon}, quoted by Athenæus.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-192">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>192 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-192">return</a>) [ {apeliotes}. Evidently, from its name {Ellespontias} and from its being afterwards called {Boreas}, it was actually a Northeast Wind.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-193">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>193 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-193">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> “Ovens.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-194">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>194 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-194">return</a>) [ {exebrassonto}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-195">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>195 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-195">return</a>) [ {thesaurous}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-196">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>196 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-196">return</a>) [ The word {khrusea}, “of gold,” is omitted by some Editors.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-197">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>197 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-197">return</a>) [ “in his case also {kai touton} there was an unpleasing misfortune of the slaying of a child {paidophonos} which troubled him,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> he like others had misfortunes to temper his prosperity.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-198">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>198 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-198">return</a>) [ {goesi}, (from a supposed word {goe}): a correction of {geosi}, “by enchanters,” which is retained by Stein. Some read {khoesi}, “with libations,” others {boesi}, “with cries.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-199">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>199 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-199">return</a>) [ {aphesein}, whence the name {Aphetai} was supposed to be derived.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-19901">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>19901 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-19901">return</a>) [ Or, “had crucified⁠ ⁠… having convicted him of the following charge, namely,” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. 35 (end).]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-200">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>200 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-200">return</a>) [ {tritaios}. According to the usual meaning of the word the sense should be “on the third day after” entering Thessaly, but the distance was much greater than a two-days’ march.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-201">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>201 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-201">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> “the Devourer.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-202">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>202 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-202">return</a>) [ {Prutaneiou}, “Hall of the Magistrates.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-203">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>203 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-203">return</a>) [ {leiton}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-204">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>204 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-204">return</a>) [ {estellonto}: many Editors, following inferior <abbr>MSS.</abbr>, read {eselthontes} and make changes in the rest of the sentence.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-205">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>205 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-205">return</a>) [ Some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {Ainienon} for {Enienon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-206">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>206 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-206">return</a>) [ {stadion}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-207">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>207 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-207">return</a>) [ {diskhilia te gar kai dismuria plethra tou pediou esti}. If the text is right, the {plethron} must here be a measure of area. The amount will then be about 5000 acres.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-208">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>208 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-208">return</a>) [ {mekhri Trekhinos}, “up to Trachis,” which was the Southern limit.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-209">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>209 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-209">return</a>) [ {to epi tautes tes epeirou}. I take {to epi tautes} to be an adverbial expression like {tes eteres} in ch. 36, for I cannot think that the rendering “towards this continent” is satisfactory.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-210">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>210 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-210">return</a>) [ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. 45.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-211">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>211 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-211">return</a>) [ {tous katesteotas}. There is a reference to the body of 300 so called {ippeis} (cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 67), who were appointed to accompany the king in war; but we must suppose that on special occasions the king made up this appointed number by selection, and that in this case those were preferred who had sons to keep up the family. Others (including Grote) understand {tous katesteotas} to mean “men of mature age.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-212">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>212 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-212">return</a>) [ {ton Pulagoron}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-213">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>213 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-213">return</a>) [ {es ten Pulaien}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-214">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>214 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-214">return</a>) [ An indication that the historian intended to carry his work further than the year 479.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-215">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>215 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-215">return</a>) [ See ch. 83.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-216">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>216 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-216">return</a>) [ {ek te tosou de katededekto eousa ouden khreste Melieusi}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> {e esbole}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-217">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>217 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-217">return</a>) [ {Melampugon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-218">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>218 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-218">return</a>) [ Lit. “had set out to go at first.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-219">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>219 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-219">return</a>) [ Lit. “and afterwards deserters were they who reported.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-220">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>220 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-220">return</a>) [ {diakrithentes}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-221">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>221 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-221">return</a>) [ {taute kai mallon te gnome pleistos eimi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-222">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>222 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-222">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the Persian.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-223">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>223 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-223">return</a>) [ {prin tond eteron dia panta dasetai}: <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> either the city or the king.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-224">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>224 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-224">return</a>) [ {mounon Spartieteon}: some Editors (following Plutarch) read {mounon Spartieteon}, “lay up for the Spartans glory above all other nations.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-225">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>225 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-225">return</a>) [ {to men gar eruma tou teikheos ephulasseto, oi de k.t.l.}]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-226">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>226 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-226">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the Lacedemonians.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-227">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>227 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-227">return</a>) [ {izonto epi ton kolonon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-228">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>228 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-228">return</a>) [ Some Editors insert {tous} after {e}, “before those who were sent away by Leonidas had departed.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-229">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>229 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-229">return</a>) [ {remasi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-230">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>230 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-230">return</a>) [ {leipopsukheonta}, a word which refers properly to bodily weakness. It has been proposed to read {philopsukheonta}, “loving his life,” cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. 29.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-231">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>231 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-231">return</a>) [ {algesanta}: some good <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {alogesanta}, which is adopted by Stein, “had in his ill-reckoning returned alone.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-232">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>232 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-232">return</a>) [ {tes autes ekhomenou prophasios}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-233">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>233 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-233">return</a>) [ {atimien}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-234">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>234 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-234">return</a>) [ {o tresas}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-235">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>235 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-235">return</a>) [ Thuc. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 2 <abbr>ff.</abbr>]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-236">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>236 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-236">return</a>) [ {tas diexodous ton bouleumaton}, cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. 156.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-237">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>237 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-237">return</a>) [ {ton vees k.t.l.}: some Editors insert {ek} before {ton}, “by which four hundred ships have suffered shipwreck.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-238">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>238 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-238">return</a>) [ {ta seoutou de tithemenos eu gnomen ekho}: for {ekho} some inferior <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {ekhe}, which is adopted by several Editors, “Rather set thy affairs in good order and determine not to consider,” <abbr>etc.</abbr>]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-239">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>239 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-239">return</a>) [ {to pareon troma}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> their defeat.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-240">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>240 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-240">return</a>) [ {kai esti dusmenes te sige}. Some commentators understand {te sige} to mean “secretly,” like {sige}, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. 74.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-241">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>241 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-241">return</a>) [ See ch. 220.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link7note-242">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>242 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link7noteref-242">return</a>) [ Many Editors pronounce the last chapter to be an interpolation, but perhaps with hardly sufficient reason.]</p>
				<!--Book VII endnotes end-->
				<!--Book VIII endnotes begin-->
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-1">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>1 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-1">return</a>) [ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. 77.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-2">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>2 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-2">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> triremes.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-3">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>3 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-3">return</a>) [ {os to plethos ekastoi ton neon pareikhonto}: some read by conjecture {oson to plethos k.t.l.}]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-4">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>4 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-4">return</a>) [ Perhaps “also” refers to the case of those who had come to Thermopylai, cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 207: Others translate, “these Hellenes who had come <i>after all</i> to Artemision,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> after all the doubt and delay.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-5">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>5 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-5">return</a>) [ {pantes}: some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {plegentes}, which is adopted by most Editors, “smitten by bribes.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-6">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>6 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-6">return</a>) [ {dethen}, with ironical sense.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-7">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>7 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-7">return</a>) [ {mede purphoron}: the {purphoros} had charge of the fire brought for sacrifices from the altar of Zeus Agetor at Sparta, and ordinarily his person would be regarded as sacred; hence the proverb {oude purphoros esothe}, used of an utter defeat.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-8">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>8 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-8">return</a>) [ {tou diekploou}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-9">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>9 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-9">return</a>) [ {kata stoma}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-10">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>10 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-10">return</a>) [ {sklerai brontai}: the adjective means “harsh-sounding.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-11">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>11 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-11">return</a>) [ {akhari}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-12">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>12 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-12">return</a>) [ {ta Koila tes Euboies}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-13">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>13 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-13">return</a>) [ “having been roughly handled.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-14">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>14 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-14">return</a>) [ {epi ten thalassan tauten}: some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> read {taute} for {tauten}, which is to be taken with {sullexas}, “he assembled the generals there.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-15">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>15 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-15">return</a>) [ {peripetea epoiesanto sphisi autoisi ta pregmata}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-16">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>16 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-16">return</a>) [ {paleseie}, a word which does not occur elsewhere, and is explained by Hesychius as equivalent to {diaphtharein}. Various emendations have been proposed, and Valla seems to have had the reading {apelaseie}, for he says <i>discessisset</i>. Stein explains {paleseie} (as from {pale}) “should contend.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-17">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>17 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-17">return</a>) [ Some suppose the number “four thousand” is interpolated by misunderstanding of the inscription in <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 228; and it seems hardly possible that the dead were so many as four thousand, unless at least half were Helots.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-18">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>18 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-18">return</a>) [ Some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have “Tritantaichmes,” which is adopted by many Editors.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-19">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>19 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-19">return</a>) [ {neou}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-20">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>20 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-20">return</a>) [ {os anarpasomenoi tous Phokeas}: cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. 60.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-21">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>21 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-21">return</a>) [ {podeon steinos}, like the neck of a wineskin; cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 121, note [Footnote 102.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-22">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>22 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-22">return</a>) [ {tou propheten}, the interpreter of the utterances of the {promantis}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-23">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>23 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-23">return</a>) [ {neou}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-24">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>24 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-24">return</a>) [ {megarou}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-25">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>25 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-25">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> of Athene Polias, the Erechtheion; so throughout this account.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-26">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>26 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-26">return</a>) [ {sunerree}, “kept flowing together.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-2601">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>2601 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-2601">return</a>) [ Or, “Hermione.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-27">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>27 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-27">return</a>) [ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 56.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-28">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>28 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-28">return</a>) [ See ch. 31.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-29">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>29 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-29">return</a>) [ {pros pantas tous allous}, “in comparison with all the rest,” cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. 94.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-30">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>30 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-30">return</a>) [ {stratarkheo}: a vague expression, because being introduced after Kecrops he could not have the title of king.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-31">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>31 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-31">return</a>) [ The number obtained by adding up the separate contingents is 366. Many Editors suppose that the ships with which the Eginetans were guarding their own coast (ch. 46) are counted here, and quote the authority of Pausanias for the statement that the Eginetans supplied more ships than any others except the Athenians. Stein suggests the insertion of the number twelve in ch. 46.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-3101">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>3101 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-3101">return</a>) [ Or, “Thespeia.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-32">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>32 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-32">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> “Areopagus.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-33">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>33 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-33">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the North side.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-34">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>34 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-34">return</a>) [ {megaron}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-35">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>35 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-35">return</a>) [ {neos}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-36">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>36 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-36">return</a>) [ {pollos en en tois logois}: cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. 91.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-37">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>37 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-37">return</a>) [ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 141⁠–⁠143.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-38">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>38 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-38">return</a>) [ {autothen ik Salaminos}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-39">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>39 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-39">return</a>) [ {te Metri kai te Koure}, Demeter and Persephone.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-40">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>40 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-40">return</a>) [ {te anakrisi}: cp. {anakrinomenous}, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. 56: Some Editors, following inferior <abbr>MSS.</abbr>, read {te krisi}, “at the judgment expressed.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-41">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>41 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-41">return</a>) [ {muriadon}, “ten thousands.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-42">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>42 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-42">return</a>) [ Or, “Hermione.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-43">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>43 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-43">return</a>) [ {oi perioikoi}: some Editors omit the article and translate “and these are the so-called Orneates or dwellers round (Argos),” Orneates being a name for the {perioikoi} of Argos, derived from the conquered city of Orneai.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-44">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>44 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-44">return</a>) [ {elpidi mainomene}, “with a mad hope.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-45">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>45 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-45">return</a>) [ {krateron Koron Ubrios uion}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-46">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>46 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-46">return</a>) [ {dokeunt ana panta tithesthai}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have also {pithesthai}. Possibly {tithesthai} might stand, though {anatithesthai} is not found elsewhere in this sense. Stein adopts in his last edition the conjecture {piesthai}, “swallow up.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-47">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>47 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-47">return</a>) [ {Kronides}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-48">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>48 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-48">return</a>) [ {potnia Nike}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-49">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>49 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-49">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> about rivalry.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-50">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>50 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-50">return</a>) [ {ton epibateon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-51">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>51 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-51">return</a>) [ Many Editors reading {osa de} and {parainesas de}, make the stop after {antitithemena}: “and in all that is produced in the nature and constitution of man he exhorted them to choose the better.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-52">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>52 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-52">return</a>) [ {o daimonioi}, “strange men.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-53">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>53 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-53">return</a>) [ See ch. 22.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-54">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>54 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-54">return</a>) [ {pros de eti kai proselabeto}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {prosebaleto}. Most Editors translate, “Moreover Ariamnes⁠ ⁠… contributed to the fate of the Phenicians, being a friend (of the Ionians);” but this does not seem possible unless we read {philos eon Iosi} (or {Ionon}). Valla translates nearly as I have done. (It does not appear that {prosballesthai} is found elsewhere in the sense of {sumballesthai}.)]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-55">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>55 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-55">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> they who were commanded to execute them.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-56">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>56 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-56">return</a>) [ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 179, 181.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-57">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>57 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-57">return</a>) [ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. 49, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, and 73.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-58">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>58 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-58">return</a>) [ {keleta}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-59">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>59 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-59">return</a>) [ {sumballontai}: the Athenians apparently are spoken of, for they alone believed the story.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-60">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>60 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-60">return</a>) [ {apoplesai}: this is the reading of the <abbr>MSS.</abbr>; but many Editors adopt corrections ({apoplesthai} or {apoplesthenai}). The subject to {apoplesai} is to be found in the preceding sentence and the connection with {ton te allon panta k.t.l.} is a loose one. This in fact is added as an afterthought, the idea being originally to call attention simply to the fulfilment of the oracle of Lysistratos.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-61">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>61 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-61">return</a>) [ {phruxousi}: a conjectural emendation, adopted by most Editors, of {phrixousi}, “will shudder (at the sight of oars).”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-62">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>62 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-62">return</a>) [ {kat allon kai allon}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {kat allon}, but Valla’s rendering is “alium atque alium.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-63">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>63 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-63">return</a>) [ {uper megalon aiorethenta}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-64">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>64 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-64">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> 300,000.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-65">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>65 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-65">return</a>) [ {os ek kakon}: some translate, “thinking that he had escaped from his troubles.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-66">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>66 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-66">return</a>) [ {toisi epikletoisi}, cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 8 and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. 42.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-67">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>67 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-67">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> Asia, as opposed to “these parts.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-68">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>68 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-68">return</a>) [ Stein would take {peri oikon ton son} with {oudemia sumphore}, but the order of words is against this.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-69">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>69 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-69">return</a>) [ {pollous pollakis agonas drameontai peri spheon auton}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-70">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>70 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-70">return</a>) [ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 175: The manner of the repetition and some points in the diction raise suspicion that the passage is interpolated here; and so it is held to be by most Editors. In <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 175 we find {tris} instead of {dis}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-71">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>71 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-71">return</a>) [ {upegagon}, cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. 72, with the idea of bringing before a court for punishment, not “by underhand means,” as it is understood by Larcher and Bähr.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-72">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>72 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-72">return</a>) [ “vengeance and Hermotimos.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-73">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>73 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-73">return</a>) [ {spheis⁠ ⁠… ergasaiato}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> read {sphi} (one {spheas}) and {ergasaito}, and this is retained by some Editors.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-74">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>74 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-74">return</a>) [ “taken.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-75">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>75 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-75">return</a>) [ {metabalon}: others translate, “he turned from them to the Athenians”; but cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 52: The words {pros tous Athenaious} are resumed by {sphi} with {elege}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-76">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>76 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-76">return</a>) [ {kai epi spheon auton balomenoi}, “even at their own venture,” cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. 71.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-77">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>77 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-77">return</a>) [ {ta idia}, “things belonging to private persons.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-78">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>78 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-78">return</a>) [ {sophos}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-79">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>79 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-79">return</a>) [ {geopeinas}, “poor in land.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-80">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>80 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-80">return</a>) [ It seems necessary to insert {an} with {einai}. For the sentiment cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 172.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-81">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>81 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-81">return</a>) [ {khreomenos toisi kai pros basilea ekhresato}. This is the reading of the best <abbr>MSS.</abbr>: the rest have {khreomenos logoisi toisi kai pros Andrious ekhresato}, “using the same language as he had before used to the Andrians.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-82">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>82 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-82">return</a>) [ {kai ten allen ippon}: some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> omit {allen}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-83">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>83 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-83">return</a>) [ {ola}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> not the whole number of them, but great masses without individual selection.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-84">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>84 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-84">return</a>) [ {ouden meros os eipein}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-85">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>85 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-85">return</a>) [ {anemon Strumonien}, “the wind called Strymonias.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-86">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>86 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-86">return</a>) [ {ta akrothinia}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the tithe.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-87">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>87 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-87">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the corner of the entrance-hall, {epi tou proneiou tes gonies}, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 51.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-88">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>88 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-88">return</a>) [ {dienemon}: some understand this to mean “distributed the voting tablets,” and some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> read {dienemonto}, “distributed among themselves,” which is adopted by many Editors.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-89">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>89 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-89">return</a>) [ {sophotatos}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-90">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>90 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-90">return</a>) [ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 67.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-91">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>91 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-91">return</a>) [ A small island near Attica, taken here as the type of insignificance. To suppose that Timodemos was connected with it is quite unnecessary. The story in Plutarch about the Seriphian is different.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-92">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>92 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-92">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> 60,000.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-93">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>93 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-93">return</a>) [ {katesphaxe}, “cut their throats.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-94">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>94 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-94">return</a>) [ {para tas gluphidas}: some Editors read {peri tas gluphidas} on the authority of Aeneas Tacticus. The {gluphides} are probably notches which give a hold for the fingers as they draw back the string.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-95">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>95 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-95">return</a>) [ {kataplexai}, “strike down” by the charge.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-96">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>96 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-96">return</a>) [ The way was shut against them ordinarily by the town of Potidaia, which occupied the isthmus.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-97">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>97 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-97">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> most of those who before served as {epibatai} (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 96) continued to serve still. The sentence is usually translated, “of those who served as fighting-men in them the greater number were Persians or Medes,” and this may be right.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-98">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>98 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-98">return</a>) [ The <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have “Charilos” or “Charillos.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-99">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>99 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-99">return</a>) [ Some Editors read “Eurypon,” which is the form found elsewhere.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-100">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>100 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-100">return</a>) [ Cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 204.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-101">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>101 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-101">return</a>) [ {duon}. It seems certain that the number required here is seven and not two, and the emendation {epta} for {duon} ({z} for {b}) is approved by several Editors.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-102">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>102 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-102">return</a>) [ {khresomenon}: the best <abbr>MSS.</abbr> read {khresamenon}, which is retained by Stein, with the meaning “charging him to consult the Oracles everywhere⁠ ⁠… and then return.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-103">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>103 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-103">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> Mardonios and the Persians.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-104">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>104 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-104">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> Theban citizens.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-105">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>105 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-105">return</a>) [ {promantin}: he is afterwards called {prophetes}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-106">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>106 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-106">return</a>) [ Cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. 21.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-107">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>107 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-107">return</a>) [ Some Editors would read “Alabastra.” Alabanda was a Carian town.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-108">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>108 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-108">return</a>) [ Counting Alexander himself as one.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-109">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>109 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-109">return</a>) [ {esan gar}: this is the reading of the best <abbr>MSS.</abbr>: others have {esan de}. Stein (reading {esan gar}) places this clause after the next, “The wife of the king herself baked their bread, for in ancient times, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>” This transposition is unnecessary; for it would be easy to understand it as a comment on the statement that three members of the royal house of Argos became farm-servants.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-110">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>110 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-110">return</a>) [ {ai turannides ton anthropon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-111">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>111 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-111">return</a>) [ {exaireton metaikhmion te ten gun ektemenon}: there are variations of reading and punctuation in the <abbr>MSS.</abbr>]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-112">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>112 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-112">return</a>) [ {sunepipte oste omou spheon ginesthai ten katastasin}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> their introduction before the assembly, cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. 46.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-113">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>113 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-113">return</a>) [ {epeximen amunomenoi}, which possibly might be translated, “we will continue to defend ourselves.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link8note-114">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>114 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link8noteref-114">return</a>) [ {karta anthropeion}.]</p>
				<!--Book VIII endnotes end-->
				<!--Book IX endnotes begin-->
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-1">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>1 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-1">return</a>) [ “the same who at the former time also were of one accord together.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-2">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>2 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-2">return</a>) [ {ta ekeinon iskhura bouleumata}: some good <abbr>MSS.</abbr> omit {iskhura}, and so many Editors.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-3">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>3 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-3">return</a>) [ {up agnomosunes}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-4">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>4 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-4">return</a>) [ {boulen}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-5">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>5 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-5">return</a>) [ {exeneikai es ton dumon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-6">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>6 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-6">return</a>) [ {aleoren}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-7">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>7 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-7">return</a>) [ Cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. 140 (a).]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-8">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>8 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-8">return</a>) [ {to men ap emeon outo akibdelon nemetai epi tous Ellenas}, “that which we owe to the Hellenes is thus paid in no counterfeit coin.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-9">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>9 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-9">return</a>) [ {ekeleusan}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> “their bidding was” when they sent us.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-901">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>901 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-901">return</a>) [ This clause, “with no less⁠—each man of them,” is omitted in some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> and considered spurious by several Editors.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-10">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>10 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-10">return</a>) [ Cp. ch. 55.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-11">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>11 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-11">return</a>) [ {perioikon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-12">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>12 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-12">return</a>) [ {ton emerodromon}, cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. 105.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-13">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>13 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-13">return</a>) [ {tugkhane eu bouleoumenos}: perhaps, “endeavour to take measures well.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-14">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>14 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-14">return</a>) [ {prodromon}, a conjectural emendation of {prodromos}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-15">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>15 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-15">return</a>) [ {boiotarkhai}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the heads of the Boeotian confederacy.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-16">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>16 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-16">return</a>) [ {os epi deka stadious malista ke}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-17">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>17 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-17">return</a>) [ {klinai}: several Editors have altered this, reading {klithenai} or {klinenai}, “they were made to recline.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-18">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>18 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-18">return</a>) [ {diapinonton}, cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. 18.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-19">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>19 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-19">return</a>) [ {polla phroneonta medenos krateein}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-20">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>20 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-20">return</a>) [ {sphodra}: not quite satisfactory with {emedizon}, but it can hardly go with {ouk ekontes}, as Krüger suggests.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-21">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>21 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-21">return</a>) [ {pheme}, as in ch. 100.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-22">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>22 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-22">return</a>) [ {proopto thanato}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-23">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>23 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-23">return</a>) [ {prosballontes}: most of the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {prosbalontes}, and so also in ch. 21 and 22 they have {prosbalouses}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-24">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>24 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-24">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the retreat with which each charge ended and the turn from retreat in preparation for a fresh charge. So much would be done without word of command, before reining in their horses.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-25">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>25 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-25">return</a>) [ {ephoiteon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-2501">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>2501 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-2501">return</a>) [ Or, according to some <abbr>MSS.</abbr>, “much contention in argument.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-26">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>26 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-26">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the left wing.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-27">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>27 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-27">return</a>) [ The name apparently should be Kepheus, but there is no authority for changing the text.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-28">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>28 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-28">return</a>) [ This is the number of nations mentioned in <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 61⁠–⁠80 as composing the land-army of Xerxes.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-29">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>29 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-29">return</a>) [ {oi epiphoiteontes}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-30">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>30 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-30">return</a>) [ {peri andra ekaston}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-31">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>31 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-31">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> 38,700.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-32">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>32 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-32">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> 69,500.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-33">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>33 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-33">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> 110,000.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-34">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>34 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-34">return</a>) [ {opla de oud outoi eikhon}: <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> these too must be reckoned with the light-armed.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-35">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>35 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-35">return</a>) [ Cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 164.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-36">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>36 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-36">return</a>) [ {makhairophoroi}: cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 89.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-37">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>37 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-37">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> 300,000: see <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. 113.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-38">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>38 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-38">return</a>) [ {geneos tou Iamideon}: the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {Klutiaden} after {Iamideon}, but the Clytiadai seem to have been a distinct family of soothsayers.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-39">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>39 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-39">return</a>) [ {pentaethlon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-40">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>40 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-40">return</a>) [ {para en palaisma edrame nikan Olumpiada}. The meaning is not clear, because the conditions of the {pentaethlon} are not known: however the wrestling {pale} seems to have been the last of the five contests, and the meaning may be that both Tisamenos and Hieronymos had beaten all the other competitors and were equal so far, when Tisamenos failed to win two out of three falls in the wrestling.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-41">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>41 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-41">return</a>) [ {metientes}: some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {metiontes}, “they went to fetch him.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-42">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>42 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-42">return</a>) [ {aiteomenos}: this is the reading of the <abbr>MSS.</abbr>, but the conjecture {aiteomenous} (or {aiteomenon}) seems probable enough: “if one may compare the man who asked for royal power with him who asked only for citizenship.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-43">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>43 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-43">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> instead of half for himself, he asks for two-thirds to be divided between himself and his brother.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-44">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>44 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-44">return</a>) [ {o pros Ithome}: a conjectural emendation of {o pros Isthmo}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-45">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>45 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-45">return</a>) [ {ton tarson eoutou}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-46">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>46 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-46">return</a>) [ {Treis Kephalas}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-47">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>47 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-47">return</a>) [ {Druos Kephalas}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-48">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>48 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-48">return</a>) [ See ch. 2.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-49">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>49 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-49">return</a>) [ {ton epikleton}: cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 8.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-50">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>50 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-50">return</a>) [ {Mardonio te kai te stratie ta sphagia ou dunatai katathumia genesthai}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-51">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>51 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-51">return</a>) [ He asks for their help to free his country also from the Persian yoke.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-52">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>52 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-52">return</a>) [ {emakhesametha}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-53">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>53 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-53">return</a>) [ {psukhre}, cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. 108.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-54">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>54 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-54">return</a>) [ {deka stadious}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-55">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>55 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-55">return</a>) [ {nesos de outo an eie en epeiro}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-56">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>56 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-56">return</a>) [ {periskhizetai}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-57">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>57 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-57">return</a>) [ {epheugon asmenoi}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-58">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>58 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-58">return</a>) [ {tou Pitaneteon lokhou}, called below {ton lokhon ton Pitaneten}. Evidently {lokhos} here is a division of considerable size.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-59">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>59 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-59">return</a>) [ {anainomenou}: some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> and many Editors read {nenomenou}, “since he was thus minded.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-60">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>60 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-60">return</a>) [ {os alla phroneonton kai alla legonton}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-61">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>61 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-61">return</a>) [ Cp. ch. 11.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-62">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>62 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-62">return</a>) [ The structure of the sentence is rather confused, and perhaps some emendation is required.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-63">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>63 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-63">return</a>) [ {eti ti lexete}. The <abbr>MSS.</abbr> and most Editors read {ti}, “what will ye say after this?” The order of the words is against this.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-64">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>64 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-64">return</a>) [ {anarpasomenoi}: cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. 28.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-65">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>65 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-65">return</a>) [ {phraxantes ta gerra}: cp. ch. 99.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-66">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>66 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-66">return</a>) [ {anoploi}, by which evidently more is meant than the absence of shields; cp. the end of ch. 63, where the equipment of the Persians is compared to that of light-armed troops.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-67">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>67 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-67">return</a>) [ See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. 114.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-68">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>68 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-68">return</a>) [ {es Leoniden}: this is ordinarily translated “as far as Leonidas;” but to say “his ancestors above Anaxandrides have been given as far as Leonidas” (the son of Anaxandrides), is hardly intelligible. The reference is to <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 204.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-69">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>69 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-69">return</a>) [ Most of the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> call him Aeimnestos (with some variation of spelling), but Plutarch has Arimnestos.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-70">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>70 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-70">return</a>) [ See ch. 15: There is no sharp distinction here between camp and palisade, the latter being merely the fortified part of the encampment.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-71">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>71 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-71">return</a>) [ {anaktoron}, a usual name for the temple of Demeter and Persephone at Eleusis.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-72">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>72 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-72">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> 40,000.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-73">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>73 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-73">return</a>) [ {ege katertemenos}: the better <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {eie} for {ege}, which is retained by some Editors ({toutous} being then taken with {inai pantas}): for {katertemenos} we find as variations {katertemenos} and {katertismenos}. Many Editors read {katertismenos} (“well prepared”), following the Aldine tradition.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-74">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>74 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-74">return</a>) [ {ephelokakeonton}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-75">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>75 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-75">return</a>) [ {en oudeni logo apolonto}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-76">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>76 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-76">return</a>) [ Stein proposes to substitute “Athenians” for “Lacedemonians” here, making the comparative {erremenestere} anticipate the account given in the next few clauses.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-77">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>77 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-77">return</a>) [ {erromenestere}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-78">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>78 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-78">return</a>) [ Cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 66.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-79">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>79 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-79">return</a>) [ {aluktazon}, a word of doubtful meaning which is not found elsewhere.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-80">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>80 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-80">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> 300,000.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-81">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>81 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-81">return</a>) [ {o Spartietes}: it has been proposed to read {Spartietai}, for it can hardly be supposed that the other two were not Spartans also.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-82">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>82 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-82">return</a>) [ One <abbr>MS.</abbr> at least calls him Aeimenstos, cp. ch. 64: Thucydides (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. [Footnote 52) mentions Aeimnestos as the name of a Plataian citizen, the father of Lacon. Stein observes that in any case this cannot be that Arimnestos who is mentioned by Plutarch as commander of the Plataian contingent.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-83">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>83 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-83">return</a>) [ {eoutou axion prophumeumenou apodexasthai}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-84">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>84 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-84">return</a>) [ {atelein te kai proedrin}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-85">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>85 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-85">return</a>) [ <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. 92.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-86">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>86 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-86">return</a>) [ {andra pentaethlon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-87">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>87 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-87">return</a>) [ {oute daimonon oute theon}: heroes and in general divinities of the second order are included under the term {daimonon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-88">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>88 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-88">return</a>) [ Most of the commentators (and following them the historians) understand the imperfect {ediokon} to express the mere purpose to attempt, and suppose that this purpose was actually hindered by the Lacedemonians, but for a mere half-formed purpose the expression {mekhri Thessalies} seems to definite, and Diodorus states that Artabazos was pursued. I think therefore that Krüger is right in understanding {eon} of an attempt to dissuade which was not successful. The alternative version would be “they were for pursuing them as far as Thessaly, but the Lacedemonians prevented them from pursuing fugitives.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-89">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>89 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-89">return</a>) [ {akinakas}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-90">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>90 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-90">return</a>) [ Whether three tithes were taken or only one is left uncertain.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-91">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>91 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-91">return</a>) [ “furniture furnished” is hardly tolerable; perhaps Herodotus wrote {skenen} for {kataskeuen} here.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-92">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>92 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-92">return</a>) [ The connection here is not satisfactory, and the chapter is in part a continuation of chapter 81: It is possible that ch. 82 may be a later addition by the author, thrown in without much regard to the context.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-93">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>93 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-93">return</a>) [ “Whereas however the body of Mardonios had disappeared on the day after the battle (taken by whom I am not able to say.⁠ ⁠…), it is reported with some show of reason that Dionysophanes, an Ephesian, was he who buried it.” The construction however is irregular and broken by parentheses: possibly there is some corruption of text.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-94">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>94 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-94">return</a>) [ {tous irenas}. Spartans between twenty and thirty years old were so called. The <abbr>MSS.</abbr> have {ireas}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-95">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>95 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-95">return</a>) [ {proxeinon}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-96">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>96 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-96">return</a>) [ “fill up more calamities,” cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. 4.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-97">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>97 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-97">return</a>) [ {es antilogien}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-98">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>98 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-98">return</a>) [ {antilogies kuresein}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-99">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>99 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-99">return</a>) [ {ten mesogaian tamnon tes odou}, cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 124: The expression seems almost equivalent to {tamnon ten mesen odon}, apart from any question of inland or coast roads.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-100">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>100 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-100">return</a>) [ {limo sustantas kai kamato}, “having struggled with hunger and fatigue.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-101">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>101 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-101">return</a>) [ {autos}: some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> read {outos}. If the text is right, it means Artabazos as distinguished from his troops.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-102">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>102 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-102">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> “leader of the army.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-10201">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>10201 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-10201">return</a>) [ {en to Ionio kolpo}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-103">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>103 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-103">return</a>) [ Stein reads {para Khona potamon}, “by the river Chon,” a conjecture derived from Theognostus.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-104">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>104 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-104">return</a>) [ It is thought by some Editors that “the prophets” just above, and these words, “and they told them,” are interpolated.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-105">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>105 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-105">return</a>) [ {emphuton mantiken}, as opposed to the {entekhnos mantike} possessed for example by Melampus, cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 49.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-106">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>106 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-106">return</a>) [ Or possibly “Calamoi.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-107">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>107 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-107">return</a>) [ <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> 60,000.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-10701">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>10701 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-10701">return</a>) [ {ton Potneion}, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> either the Eumenides or Demeter and Persephone.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-108">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>108 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-108">return</a>) [ {apistous toisi Ellesi}. Perhaps the last two words are to be rejected, and {apistous} to be taken in its usual sense, “distrusted”; cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. 22.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-109">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>109 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-109">return</a>) [ {neokhmon an ti poieein}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-110">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>110 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-110">return</a>) [ {pheme eseptato}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-111">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>111 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-111">return</a>) [ {eteralkea}, cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. 11.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-112">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>112 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-112">return</a>) [ {ton Perseon}: perhaps we should read {ek ton Perseon}, “appointed by the Persians to guard the passes.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-113">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>113 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-113">return</a>) [ {ti neokhmon poieoien}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-114">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>114 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-114">return</a>) [ {ten kephalen smatai}: the meaning is uncertain.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-115">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>115 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-115">return</a>) [ {Pou de kou me apolesas}: some Editors read {ko} for {kou} (by conjecture), and print the clause as a statement instead of a question, “not yet hast thou caused by ruin.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-116">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>116 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-116">return</a>) [ {en to aduto}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-117">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>117 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-117">return</a>) [ {aphuktos}: many Editors adopt the reading {aphulakto} from inferior <abbr>MSS.</abbr>, “they fell upon him when he was, as one may say, off his guard.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-118">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>118 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-118">return</a>) [ {estergon ta pareonta}.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-119">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>119 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-119">return</a>) [ {ekpheugonta}: many Editors have {ekphugonta}, “after he had escaped.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-120">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>120 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-120">return</a>) [ {tarikhos eon}. The word {tarikhos} suggests the idea of human bodies embalmed, as well as of dried or salted meat.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-121">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>121 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-121">return</a>) [ {oi}: some Editors approve the conjecture {moi}, “impose upon myself this penalty.”]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-122">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>122 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-122">return</a>) [ {sanidas}: some read by conjecture {sanidi}, or {pros sanida}: cp. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. 33.]</p>
				<p>
					<a id="link9note-123">
						<!-- Note -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>123 (<a class="pginternal" href="#link9noteref-123">return</a>) [ Or, “when he had heard this, although he did not admire the proposal, yet bade them do so if they would.”]</p>
				<!--Book IX endnotes end-->
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
